I don’t believe that uh that Mr. Carter’s been any more specific in this case than he has been on many other instances. I notice particularly that he didn’t endorse the Humphrey-Hawkins bill which he has on occasions and which is included as a part of the Democratic platform. That legislation uh allegedly would help our unemployment, but uh – we all know that it would’ve controlled our economy, it would’ve added uh – ten to thirty billion dollars each year in additional expenditures by the Federal Government. It would’ve called for export controls on agricultural products In my judgment the best way to get jobs is to uh – expand the private sector, where five out of six jobs today exist in our economy. We can do that by reducing Federal taxes as I proposed uh – about a year ago when I called for a tax reduction of $28 billion – three-quarters of it to go to private uh taxpayers and uh one-quarter to the business sector. We could add to jobs in the major metropolitan areas by a proposal that I recommended that would give tax incentives to business to move into the inner city and to expand or to build new plants so that they would take a plant, or expand a plant where people are, and people are currently unemployed. We could uh – also uh – help our youths with some of the proposals that uh – would give to young people an opportunity to work and learn at the same time just like we give money to young people who are going to college. Those are the kind of specifics that I think we have to discuss on these uh – debates, and these are the kind of programs that I’ll talk about on my time. At the time, Mr. Gannon, that I made the recommendation for a $28 billion tax cut – three-quarters of it to go to individual taxpayers and 25 percent to American business. I said at the time that we had to hold the lid an federal spending, that for every dollar of a tax reduction we had to have an equal reduction in federal expenditures – a one-for-one proposition. And I recommended that to the Congress with a budget ceiling of three hundred and ninety-five billion dollars, and that would have permitted us to have a $25 billion tax reduction. In my tax reduction program for middle-income taxpayers, I recommended that the Congress increase personal exemptions from seven hundred and fifty dollars per person to one thousand dollars per person. That would mean, of course, that for a family of four that that family would have a thousand dollars more personal exemption – money that they could spend for their own purposes, money that the government wouldn’t have to spend. But if we keep the lid on federal spending, which I think we can – with the help of the Congress, we can justify fully a $28 billion tax reduction. In the budget that I submitted to the Congress in January this year, I re- recommended a 50 percent cutback in the rate of growth of federal spending. For the last ten years the budget of the United States has grown from uh – about 11 percent per year. We can’t afford that kind of growth in federal spending. And in the budget that I recommended we cut it in half – a growth rate of 5 to 5 and one-half percent. With that kind of limitation, on federal spending, we can fully justify the tax reductions that I have proposed. And it seems to me with the stimulant of more money in the hands of the taxpayers, and with more money in the hands of business to expand, to modernize, to provide more jobs, our economy stimulated so that we’ll get more revenue and we’ll have a more prosperous economy. That tax bill does not entirely meet the criteria that I established. I think the Congress should have uh – added another $10 billion reduction in personal income taxes, including the increase of personal exemptions from seven hundred and fifty to a thousand dollars. And Congress could have done that if the budget committees of the Congress, and the Congress as a whole, had not increased the spending that I recommended in the budget. I’m sure that you know that in the resolutions passed by the Congress, that have added about $17 billion in more spending, by the Congress over the budget that I recommended. So I would prefer in that tax bill to have an additional tax cut and a further limitation on federal spending. Now this tax bill – that hasn’t reached the White House yet, but is expected in a day or two – it’s about fifteen hundred pages. It has some good provisions in it. It has – uh left out some that I have recommended, unfortunately. On the other hand, uh when you have a bill of that magnitude, with – tho- those many provisions, a president has to sit and decide if there’s more good than bad. And from the a- analysis that I’ve made so far, it seems to me that that tax bill does uh – justify my signature and my approval. If it is uh true that there will be a $60 billion surplus by fiscal year 1981, rather than spend that money for all the new programs that Governor Carter recommends and endorses, and which are included in the Democratic platform, I think the American taxpayer ought to get an additional tax break – a tax reduction of that magnitude. I feel that the taxpayers are the ones that need the relief: I don’t think we should add additional programs of the magnitude that Governor Carter talks about. It seems to me that our tax structure today has rates that are too high. But I am uh – very glad to point out that since 1969, during a Republican administrations, we have had ten million people taken off of the tax rolls at the lower end of the taxpayer area. And at the same time, assuming that I sign the tax bill that was mentioned by Mr. Gannon, we will in the last two tax bills have increased the minimum tax on all wealthy taxpayers. And I believe that by eliminating ten million taxpayers in the last uh eight years, and by putting a heavier tax burden on those in the higher tax brackets, plus the other actions that’ve been taken uh – we can give taxpayers adequate tax relief. Now it seems to me that uh – as we look at the recommendations of the budget committees and our own projections, there isn’t going to be any $60 billion dividend. I’ve heard of those dividends in the past; it always happens. We expected one at the time of the Vietnam War, but it was used up before we ever ended the war and taxpayers never got the adequate relief they deserved. The amnesty program that I recommended in Chicago in September of 1974 would give to all draft evaders and – uh military deserters the opportunity to earn their uh – good record back. About fourteen to fifteen thousand did take advantage of that program. We gave them ample time. I am against- an across-the-board pardon of draft evaders or military deserters. Now in the case of Mr. Nixon, the reason the – the pardon was given, was that, when I took office this country was in a very, very divided condition. There was hatred, there was divisiveness – uh people had lost faith in their government in many, many respects. Mr. Nixon resigned, and I became president. It seemed to me that if I was to uh adequately and effectively handle the problems of high inflation, a growing recession, the uh – involvement of the United States still in Vietnam that I had to give a hundred percent of my time to those two major problems. Mr. Nixon resigned. That is disgrace. The first President out of thirty-eight that ever resigned from public office under pressure. So when you look at the penalty that he paid, and when you analyze the requirements that I had – to spend all of my time working on the economy, which was in trouble, that I inherited; working on our problems in Southeast Asia – which were still plaguing us – it seemed to me that Mr. Nixon had been penalized enough by his resignation in disgrace and the need, and necessity for me to concentrate on the problems of the country fully justified the action that I took. Well, Mr. Carter has uh indicated that uh – he would give a blanket pardon to all uh – draft evaders. I do not agree with that point of view. I gave, in September of 1974, an opportunity for all draft evaders, all deserters, to come in voluntarily, clear their records by earning an opportunity to restore their good citizenship. I think we gave them a good opportunity – we’re – I don’t think we should go any further. I think the record should show, Mr. Newman, that uh – the Bureau of Census – we checked it just yesterday – indicates that uh – in the four years that uh – Governor Carter was governor of the state of Georgia, uh – expenditures by the government went up over 50 percent Uh – employees of the government in Georgia during his term of office went up over 25 percent; and the figures also show that the uh, uh – bonded indebtedness of the state of Georgia during his governorship went up over 20 percent. And there was some very interesting testimony given by Governor Carter’s successor, Governor Busby, before a Senate committee a few uh – months ago on how he found the Medicaid program when he came into office following Governor Carter. He testified, and these are his words – the present governor of Georgia – he says he found the Medicaid program in Georgia in shambles. Now let me talk about what we’ve done in the White House as far as federal employees are concerned The first order that I issued after I became president was to cut or eliminate the prospective forty-thousand increase in federal employees that had been scheduled by my predecessor. And in the term that I’ve been president – some two years – we have reduced federal employment by eleven thousand. In the White House staff itself, when I became president, we had roughly five hundred and forty employees. We now have about four hundred and eighty-five employees, so we’ve made a rather significant reduction in the number of employees on the White House staff working for the president. So I think our record of cutting back employees, plus the failure on the part of the Governor’s programs to actually save employment in Georgia, shows which is the better plan. Well, in the uh – last two years, as I indicated before, we had a very tough time. We were faced with uh – heavy inflation, over 12 percent; we were faced with substantial unemployment. But in the last uh – twenty-four months we’ve turned the economy around and we’ve brought inflation down to under 6 percent, and we have reduced the uh – well, we have added employment of about four million in the last seventeen months to the point where we have eighty-eight million people working in America today – the most in the history of the country. The net result is we are going to have some improvement in our receipts. And I think we’ll have some decrease in our disbursements. We expect to have a lower deficit in fiscal year 1978. We feel that with this improvement in the economy; we feel with more receipts and fewer disbursements we can in a moderate way increase, as I recommended, over the next ten years a new parks program that would cast a billion and a half dollars, doubling our national park system. We have recommended that in the h- housing program we can reduce down payments and moderate monthly payments. But that doesn’t cost any more as far as the federal treasury is concerned. We believe that we can uh do a better job in the area of crime, but that requires a tougher sentencing, mandatory certain prison sentences for those who violate our criminal laws. We – uh believe that uh you can revise the federal criminal code, which has not been revised in a good many years. That doesn’t cost any more money. We believe that you can uhh – do something more effectively with a moderate increase in money in the drug abuse program. We feel that uh – in education we can have a slight increase – not a major increase. It’s my understanding that Governor Carter has indicated that uh – he approves of a $30 billion uh – expenditure by the federal government as far as education is concerned. At the present time we’re spending roughly three billion five hundred million dollars. I don’t know where that money would come from. But as we look at the quality-of-life programs – jobs, health, education, crime, recreation – we feel that as we move forward with a healthier economy, we can absorb the small necessary cost that will be required. We feel that uh – with the programs that I have recommended, the additional $10 billion tax cut, with the moderate increases in the quality-of-life area, we can still have a balanced budget which I will submit to the Congress in January of 1978. We won’t wait one year or two years longer, as Governor Carter uh – indicates. As the economy improves, and it is improving, our gross national product this year will average about 6 percent increase over last year. We will have the lower rate of inflation for the uh – calendar year this year – something slightly under 6 percent. Employment will be up, revenues will be up. We’ll keep the lid on some of these programs that we can hold down as we have a little extra money to spend for those quality-of-life programs which I think are needed and necessary. Now I cannot, and would not, endorse the kind of program that uh – Governor Carter recommends. He endorses the Democratic uh – platform which, as I read it, calls for approximately sixty additional programs. We estimate that those programs would add a hundred billion dollars minimum and probably two hundred billion dollars – uhh maximum each year to the federal budget. Those programs you cannot afford and give tax relief. We feel that you can hold the line and restrain federal spending, give a tax reduction and still have a balanced budget by 1978. Governor Carter skims over a very serious and a very broad subject. In January of uh – 1975 I submitted to the Congress and to the American people the first comprehensive energy program recommended by any president. It called for an increase in the production of energy in the United States. It called for uh – conservation measures so that we would save the energy that we have. If you’re going to increase domestic oil and gas production – and we have to – you have to give those producers an opportunity to uh – develop their land or their wells. I recommended to the Congress that we should increase production in this country from six hundred million tons a year to twel- a- a billion two hundred million tons by 1985. In order to do that we have to improve our extraction of coal from the ground; we have to improve our utilization of coal – make it more efficient, make it cleaner. In addition we uh – have to expand our research and development. In my program for energy independence we have increased, for example, solar energy research from about $84 million a year to about a hundred and twenty million dollars a year. We’re going as fast as the experts say we should. In nuclear power we have increased the research and development, uh – under the Energy Research and Development Agency uh – very substantially, to insure that our ener- uh – nuclear power plants are safer, that they are more efficient, and that we have adequate safeguards. I think you have to have greater oil and gas production, more coal production, more nuclear production, and in addition you have to have energy conservation. The bills that I vetoed, the one for an additional $6 billion, was not a bill that would have solved our unemployment problems. Even the proponents of it admitted that no more than four hundred thousand jobs would be uh – made available. Our analysis indicates that something in the magnitude of about one hundred fifty to two hundred thousand jobs would uh – be made available. Each one of those jobs would’ve cost the taxpayers $25 thousand. In addition, the jobs would not be available right now. They would not have materialized for about nine to eighteen months. The immediate problem we have is to stimulate our economy now so that we can get rid of unemployment. What we have done is to hold the lid on spending in an effort to reduce the rate of inflation. And we have proven, I think very conclusively, that you can reduce the rate of inflation and increase jobs. For example, as I have said, we have added some four million jobs in the last seventeen months. We have now employed eighty-eight million people in America, the largest number in the history of the United States. We’ve added five hundred thousand jobs in the last two months. Inflation is the quickest way to destroy jobs. And by holding the lid on federal spending we have been able to do an- a good job, an affirmative job in inflation and as a result have added to the jobs in this country. I think it’s uh – also appropriate to point out that through our tax policies we have stimulated uhh – added employment throughout the country, the investment tax credit, the tax incentives for expansion and modernization of our industrial capacity. It’s my – my opinion that the private sector, where five out of six jobs are, where you have permanent jobs, with the opportunity for advancement, is a better place than make-work jobs under the program recommended by the Congress. Well, that bill has not yet come down to the Oval Office, so I am not in a position to make any judgment on it tonight. But that is an extra $4 billion that would uh – add to the deficit which would add to the inflationary pressures, which would help to destroy jobs in the private sector – not make jobs, where the jobs really are. These make-work, temporary jobs – dead end as they are – are not the kind of jobs that we want for our people. I think it’s interesting to point out that uh – in the uh – two years that I’ve been president I’ve vetoed fifty-six bills. Congress has sustained forty-two vetoes. As a result, we have saved over $9 billion in federal expenditures. And the Congress by overriding the bills that I did veto, the Congress has added some $13 billion to the federal expenditures and to the federal deficit. Now Governor Carter complains about the deficits that uh – uh – this administration has had. And yet he condemns the vetoes that I have made that has – that have saved the taxpayer $9 billion and could have saved an additional $13 billion. Now he can’t have it both ways. And therefore, it seems to me that we should hold the lid, as we have, to the best of our ability so we can stimulate the private economy and get the jobs where the jobs are – five out of six in this economy. Governor Carter’s answer tonight does not coincide with the answer that he gave in an interview to the Associated Press a week or so ago. In that interview uh – Governor Carter indicated that uh – he would raise the taxes on those in the medium or middle-income brackets or higher. Now if you uh – take the medium or middle-income taxpayer – that’s about $14 thousand per person – uh – Governor Carter has indicated, publicly, in an interview that he would increase the taxes on about 50 percent of the working people of this country. I think uh – the way to get tax equity in this country is to give tax relief to the middle-income people who have an income from roughly $8 thousand up to twenty-five or thirty thousand dollars. They have been short-changed as we have taken ten million taxpayers off the tax rolls in the last eight years, and as we have uh – added to the minimum tax uh – provision to make all people pay more taxes. I believe in tax equity for the middle-income taxpayer, increasing the personal exemption. Mr. Carter wants to increase taxes for roughly half of the taxpayers of this country. Now, the Governor has also played a little fast and loose with the facts about vetoes. The records show that President Roosevelt vetoed an average of fifty-five bills a year. President Truman vetoed on the average, while he was president, about thirty-eight bills a year. I understand that Governor Carter, when he was Governor of Georgia, vetoed between thirty-five and forty bills a year. My average in two years is twenty-six. But in the process of that we have saved uhh – $9 billion. And one final comment, uh – Governor Carter talks about the tax bills and all of the inequities that exist in the present law. I must remind him the Democrats have controlled the Congress for the last twenty-two years and they wrote all the tax bills. There is a considerable anti-Washington feeling throughout the country. But I think the feeling is misplaced. In the last two years, we have restored integrity in the White House, and we’ve set high standards in the executive branch of the government. The anti-Washington feeling, in my opinion, ought to be focused on the Congress of the United States. For example, this Congress, very shortly, will spend a billion dollars a year for its housekeeping, its salaries, its expenses and the like. It – the next Congress will probably be the first billion-dollar Congress in the history of the United States. I don’t think the American people are getting their money’s worth from the majority party that run this Congress. We, in addition, see that uh – in the last uh – four years the number of employees hired by the Congress has gone up substantial- uh much more than uh – the gross national product, much more than any other increase throughout our society. Congress is hiring people by the droves, and the cast as a result has gone up. And I don’t see any improvement in the performance of the Congress under the present leadership. So it seems to me instead of the anti-Washington feeling being aimed at everybody in Washington, it seems to me that the focus should be where the problem is, which is the Congress of the United States, and particularly the majority in the Congress. They spend too much money on themselves. They have too many employees. There’s some question about their morality. It seems to me that in this election, the focus should not be on the executive branch but the corrections should come as the voters vote for their members of the House of Representatives or for their United States senator. That’s where the problem is and I hope there’ll be some corrective action taken so we can get some new leadership in the Congress of the United States. Well, It seems to me that uh – we have a chance – the Republicans – to get a majority in the House of Representatives. We will make some gains in the United States Senate. So there will be different ratios in the House, as well as in the Senate, and as president I will be able to uh – work with that Congress. But let me take the other side of the coin, if I might. Supposing we had – had a Democratic Congress for the last two years and we’d had uh – Governor Carter as President. He has, in effect, said that he would agree with all of – he would disapprove of the vetoes that I have made, and would have added significantly to expenditures and the deficit in the federal government. I think it would be contrary to one of the basic concepts in our system of government – a system of checks and balances. We have a Democratic Congress today, and fortunately we’ve had a Republican president to check their excesses with my vetoes. If we have a Democratic Congress next year, and a president who wants to spend an additional one hundred billion dollars a year, or maybe two hundred billion dollars a year, with more programs, we will have in my judgment, greater deficits with more spending, more dangers of inflation. I think the American people want a Republican president to check on any excesses that come out of the next Congress, if it is a Democratic Congress. The chairman of the Federal Reserve Board should be independent. Fortunately, he has been during Democratic as well as Republican administrations. As the result in the last uh – two years uh – we have had a responsible monetary policy. Uh the Federal Reserve Board indicated that the supply of money would be held between four to four and a half and seven and seven and a half. They have done a good job in integrating the money supply with the uh – fiscal policy of the uh – executive and legislative branches of the government. It would be catastrophic if the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board became the tool of the political uh – party that was in power. It’s important for our future uhh – economic security that that job be nonpolitical and uh – separate from the executive and the Legislative branches. You are familiar, of course, with the fact that I am the first president in thirty years who has reorganized the intelligence agencies in the federal government: the CIA, the Defense Intelligence Agency, the National Security Agency and the others. We’ve done that by executive order. Uhh – and I think uh – we’ve tightened it up; we’ve uh – straightened out their problems that developed over the last few years. It doesn’t seem to me that it’s needed or necessary to have legislation in this particular regard. Uhh – I have recommended to the Congress, however – I’m sure you’re familiar with this – legislation that would uhh – make it uhh – very uhh – proper in – in the right way, that the attorney general could go in and get the right for wiretapping under security cases. This was an effort that was made by the attorney general and myself, working with the Congress. But even in this area, where I think new legislation would be justified, uh the Congress has not responded. So, I feel in that case, as well as in the reorganization of the intelligence agencies, as I’ve done, we have to do it by executive order. And I’m glad that we have a good director in George Bush. We have good executive orders, and the CIA and the DIA and NASA uh – uh – NSA are now doing a good job under proper supervision. On November second all of you will make a very, very important decision. One of the major issues in this campaign is trust. A president should never promise more than he can deliver and a president should always deliver everything that he’s promised. A president can’t be all things to all people. A president should be the same thing to all people. Another issue in this campaign, Governor Carter has endorsed the Democratic platform, which calls for more spending, bigger deficits, more inflation or mare taxes. Governor Carter has embraced the record of the present Congress, dominated by his political party. It calls for more of the same. Governor Carter in his acceptance speech called for more and more programs, which means more and more government. I think the real issue in this campaign, and that which you must decide on November second, is whether you should vote for his promise or my performance in two years in the White House. On the fourth of July we had a wonderful two hundredth birthday – for our great country. It was a superb occasion. It was a glorious day. In the first century of our nation’s history our forefathers gave us the finest form of government in the history of mankind. In the second century of our nation’s history, our forefathers developed the most productive industrial nation in the history of the globe. Our third century should be the century of individual freedom for all our two hundred and fifteen million Americans today and all that join us. In the last few years government has gotten bigger and bigger; industry has gotten larger and larger; labor unions have gotten bigger and bigger; and our children have been the victims of mass education. We must make this next century the century of the individual. We should never forget that a government big enough to give us everything we want is a government big enough to take from us everything we have. The individual worker in the plants throughout the United States should not be a small cog in a big machine. The member of a labor union must have his rights strengthened and broadened and our children in their education should have an opportunity to improve themselves based on their talents and their abilities. My mother and father, during the Depression, worked very hard to give me an opportunity to do better in our great country. Your mothers and fathers did the same thing for you and others. Betty and I have worked very hard to give our children a brighter future in the United States, our beloved country. You and others in this great country have worked hard and done a great deal to give your children and your grandchildren the blessings of a better America. I believe we can all work together to make the individuals in the future have more and all of us working together can build a better America.
Governor Carter again is talking in broad generalities. Let me take just one question that he raises – the military strength and capability of the United States. Governor Carter in November of 1975 indicated that he wanted to cut the defense budget by $15 billion. A few months later, he said he wanted to cut the defense budget by eight or nine billion dollars. And more recently, he talks about cutting the defense budget by five to seven billion dollars. There is no way you can be strong militarily and have those kind of reductions in our military uh – appropriation. Now let me just tell you a little story. About uh – late October of 1975, I asked the then Secretary of Defense, Mr. Schlesinger, to tell me what had to be done if we were going to reduce the defense budget by uh – three to five billion dollars. A few days later, Mr. Schlesinger came back and said if we cut the defense budget by three to five billion dollars, we will have to cut military personnel by two hundred and fifty thousand, civilian personnel by a hundred thousand, jobs in America by a hundred thousand. We would have to stretch out our aircraft procurement, we would have to reduce our naval construction program, we would have to reduce the uh – research and development for the Army, the Navy, the Air Force and Marines by 8 percent. We would have to close twenty military bases in the United States immediately. That’s the kind of defense program that uh – Mr. Carter wants. Let me tell you this straight from the shoulder. You don’t negotiate with Mr. Brezhnev from weakness. And the kind of defense program that Mr. Carter wants will mean a weaker defense and a poor negotiating position. Governor Carter again contradicts himself. He complains about secrecy and yet he is quoted as saying that in the attempt to find a solution in the Middle East that he would hold unpublicized meetings with the Soviet Union – I presume for the purpose of an – imposing a settlement on Israel and the Arab nations. But let me talk just a minute about what we’ve done to avoid secrecy in the Ford administration. After the United States took the initiative in working with Israel and with Egypt and achieving the Sinai II agreement – and I’m proud to say that not a single Egyptian or Israeli soldier has lost his life since the signing of the Sinai agreement. But at the time that uh – I submitted the Sinai agreement to the Congress of the United States, I submitted every single document that was applicable to the Sinai II agreement. It was the most complete documentation by any president of any agreement signed by a president on behalf of the United States. Now as far as meeting with the Congress is concerned, during the twenty-four months that I’ve been the president of the United States I have averaged better than one meeting a month with responsible groups or committees of the Congress – both House and Senate. The secretary of state has appeared in the several years that he’s been the secretary before eighty different uh – committee hearings in the House and in the Senate. The secretary of state has made better than fifty speeches all over the United States explaining American foreign policy. I have made myself at least ten uh – speeches in various parts of the country where I have discussed with the American people defense and foreign policy. I believe that we have uh – negotiated with the Soviet Union since I’ve been president from a position of strength. And let me cite several examples. Shortly after I became president in uh – December of 1974, I met with uh – General Secretary Brezhnev in Vladivostok and we agreed to a mutual cap on the ballistic missile launchers at a ceiling of twenty-four hundred – which means that the Soviet Union, if that becomes a permanent agreement, will have to make a reduction in their launchers that they now have or plan to have. I’ve negotiated at Vladivostok with uh – Mr. Brezhnev a limitation on the MIRVing of their ballistic missiles at a figure of thirteen-twenty, which is the first time that any president has achieved a cap either on launchers or on MIRVs. It seems to me that we can go from there to uh – the uh – grain sales. The grain sales have been a benefit to American agriculture. We have achieved a five and three quarter year uh – sale of a minimum six million metric tons, which means that they have already bought about four million metric tons this year and are bound to buy another two million metric tons to take the grain and corn and wheat that the American farmers have produced in order to uh – have full production. And these grain sales to the Soviet Union have helped us tremendously in meeting the costs of the additional oil and – the oil that we have bought from overseas. If we turn to Helsinki – I’m glad you raised it, Mr. uh – Frankel. In the case of Helsinki, thirty-five nations signed an agreement, including the secretary of state for the Vatican – I can’t under any circumstances believe that the – His Holiness, the Pope would agree by signing that agreement that the thirty-five nations have turned over to the Warsaw Pact nations the domination of the – Eastern Europe. It just isn’t true. And if Mr. Carter alleges that His Holiness by signing that has done it, he is totally inaccurate. Now, what has been accomplished by the Helsinki agreement? Number one, we have an agreement where they notify us and we notify them of any uh – military maneuvers that are to be be undertaken. They have done it. In both cases where they’ve done so, there is no Soviet domination of Eastern Europe and there never will be under a Ford administration. I don’t believe, uh – Mr. Frankel that uh – the Yugoslavians consider themselves dominated by the Soviet Union. I don’t believe that the Rumanians consider themselves dominated by the Soviet Union. I don’t believe that the Poles consider themselves dominated by the Soviet Union. Each of those countries is independent, autonomous: it has its own territorial integrity and the United States does not concede that those countries are under the domination of the Soviet Union. As a matter of fact, I visited Poland, Yugoslavia and Rumania to make certain that the people of those countries understood that the president of the United States and the people of the United are dedicated to their independence, their autonomy and their freedom. Governor Carter uh – apparently doesn’t realize that since I’ve been president we have sold to the Israelis over $4 billion in military hardware. We have made available to the Israelis over 45 percent of the total economic and military aid since the establishment of Israel twenty-seven years ago. So the Ford administration has done a good job in helping our good ally, Israel, and we’re dedicated to the survival and security of Israel. I believe that Governor Carter doesn’t realize the need and necessity for arms sales to Iran. He indicates he would not make those. Iran is bordered very extensively by the Soviet Union. Iran has Iraq as one of its neighbors. The Soviet Union and the Communist-dominated government of Iraq are neighbors of Iran, and Iran is an ally of the United States. It’s my strong feeling that we ought to sell arms to Iran for its own national security, and as an ally – a strong ally of the United States. The history of our relationship with Iran goes back to the days of President Truman when he decided that it was vitally necessary for our own security as well as that of Iran, that we should help that country, and Iran has been a good ally. In 1973 when there was an oil embargo, Iran did not participate. Iran continued to sell oil to the United States. I believe that it’s in our interest and in the interest of Israel and Iran, and Saudi Arabia, for the United States to sell arms to those countries. It’s for their security as well as ours. Our relationship with the People’s Republic of China is based upon the Shanghai Communique, of 1972, and that communique, calls for the normalization of relations between the United States and the People’s Republic. It doesn’t set a times schedule. It doesn’t uh – make a determination as to how uh – that relationship should be achieved in relationship to our current uhh – diplomatic recognition and obligations to the Taiwanese Government. The Shanghai Communique, does say that the differences between the People’s Republic on the one hand and Taiwan on the other shall be settled by peaceful means. The net result is this administration, and during my time as the president for the next four years, we will continue to move for normalization of relations in the traditional sense, and we will insist that the disputes between Taiwan and the People’s Republic be settled peacefully, as was agreed in the Shanghai Communique, of 1972. The Ford administration will not let down, will not eliminate or forget our obligation to the people of Taiwan. We feel that there must be a continued obligation to the people, the some nineteen or twenty million people in Taiwan. And as we move during the next four years, those will be the policies of this administration. There is no policy of this government to give to the People’s Republic, or to sell to the People’s Republic of China, military equipment. I do not believe that we, the United States, should sell, give or otherwise transfer military hardware to the People’s Republic of China, or any other Communist nation, such as the Soviet Union and the like. Let me say very categorically you cannot maintain the security of the United States with the kind of defense budget cuts that Governor Carter has indicated. In 1975 he wanted to cut the budget $15 billion. He’s now down to a figure of five to seven billion dollars. Reductions of that kind will not permit the United States to be strong enough to deter aggression and maintain the peace. Governor Carter apparently doesn’t know the facts. As soon as I became president, I initiated a meeting with the NATO heads of state and met with them in Brussels to discuss how we could improve the re- defense relationship in Western Europe. In uh – November of 1975 I met with the leaders of the five industrial nations in France for the purpose of seeing what we could do acting together to meet the problems of uh – the coming recession. In Puerto Rico this year, I met with six of the leading industrial nations’ heads of state to meet the problem of inflation so we would be able to solve it before it got out of hand. I have met with the heads of government bilaterally as well as multilaterally. Our relations with Japan have never been better. I was the first United States president to visit Japan. And we uh – had the emperor of Japan here this uh – past year and the net result is Japan and the United States are working more closely together now than at any time in the history of our relationship. You can go around the world – and let me take Israel for example. Just recently, President Rabin said that our relations were never better. First we have to understand that SALT I expires October third 1977. Uh – Mr. Brezhnev and I met in Vladivostok in December of 1974 for the purpose of trying to take the initial step so we could have a SALT II agreement that would go to l985. As I indicated earlier, we did agree on a twenty-four-hundred limitation on uh – uh – launchers of ballistic missiles. Uh – that would mean a cutback in the Soviet program; it would not interfere with our own program. At the same time, we put a limitation of thirteen hundred and twenty on MIRVs. Our technicians have been working since that time in Geneva, trying to put into technical language a – an agreement that can be verified by both parties. In the meantime, there has developed the problem of the Soviet Backfire – their high-performance aircraft which they say is not a long-range aircraft and which some of our people say is a intercontinental aircraft. In the interim, there has been the development on our part primarily, the cruise missiles; cruise missiles that could be launched from land-based mobile installations; cruise missiles that could be launched – launched from high-performance aircraft, like the B-52s or the B-1s, which I hope we proceed with; cruise missiles which could be launched from either surface or submarine uh – naval vessels. Those gray-area weapons systems are creating some problems in a – the agreement for a SALT II negotiation. But I can say that I am dedicated to proceeding, and I met just last week with the foreign minister of the Soviet Union, and he indicated to me that uh – the Soviet Union was interested in narrowing the differences and making a realistic and a sound compromise. I hope and trust, in the best interest of both countries, and in the best interests of all people throughout this globe, that the Soviet Union and the United States can make a mutually beneficial agreement. Because if we do not and SALT I expires on October three, 1977, you will unleash again an all-out nuclear arms race with the potential of a nuclear holocaust of unbelievable dimensions. So it’s the obligation of the president to do just that, and I intend to do so. Governor Carter uh – brags about the unemployment during Democratic administrations and condemns the unemployment at the present time. I must remind him that we’re at peace and during the period that he brags about unemployment being low, the United States was at war. Now let me correct one other comment that uh – Governor Carter has made. I have recommended to the Congress that we develop the uranium enrichment plant at Portsmouth, Ohio, which is a publicly owned – U.S. government facility and have indicated that the private program which would follow on in Alabama is one that may or may not uhh – be constructed. But I am committed to the one at Portsmouth, Ohio. The governor also talks about morality in foreign policy. The foreign policy of the United States meets the highest standards of morality. What is more moral than peace, and the United States is at peace today? What is more moral in foreign policy than for the administration to take the lead in the World Food Conference in Rome in 1974 when the United States committed six million metric tons of food – over 60 percent of the food committed for the disadvantaged and underdeveloped nations of the world? The Ford administration wants to eradicate hunger and disease in our underdeveloped countries throughout the world. What is more moral than for the United States under the Ford administration to take the lead in southern Africa, in the Middle East? Those are initiatives in foreign policy which are of the highest moral standard and that is indicative of the foreign policy of this country. I believe that uh – our foreign policy must express the highest standards of morality. And the initiatives that we took in southern Africa are the best examples of what this administration is doing and will continue to do in the next four years. If the United States had not moved when we did in southern Africa, there’s no doubt there would have been an acceleration of bloodshed in that tragic part of the world. If we had not taken our initiative, it’s very, very possible that uh – the government of Rhodesia would have been overrun and that the Soviet Union and the Cubans would have dominated uh – southern Africa. So the United States, seeking to preserve the principle of self-determination, to eliminate the possibility of bloodshed, to protect the rights of the minority as we insisted upon the rights of the majority, uh – I believe followed the good conscience of the American people in foreign policy. And I believe that we used our skill. Secretary of State Kissinger has done a superb job in working with the black African nations, the so-called front-line nations. He has done a superb job in getting the prime minister of South Africa, Mr. Vorster, to agree that the time had come for a solution to the problem of Rhodesia. Secretary Kissinger, in his meeting with uh – Prime Minister Smith of Rhodesia, was able to convince him that it was in the best interests of whites as well as blacks in Rhodesia to find an answer for a transitional government and then a majority government. This is a perfect example of the kind of leadership that the United States, under this administration, has taken. And I can assure you that this administration will follow that high moral principle in our future efforts in foreign policy, including our efforts in the Middle East where it is vitally important because the Middle East is the crossroads of the world. There’ve been more disputes in its area where there’s more volatility than any other place in the world. But because Arab nations and the Israelis trust the United States, we were able to take the lead in the Sinai II Agreement. And I can assure you that the United States will have the leadership role in moving toward a comprehensive settlement of the Middle Eastern problems, I hope and trust as soon as possible. And we will do it with the highest moral principles. I would hope that as we move to one area of the world from another – and the United States must not spread itself too thinly – that was one of the problems that helped to create the circumstances in Vietnam – but as we as a nation find that we are asked by the various parties, either one nation against another or individuals within a nation, that the United States will take the leadership and try to resolve the differences. Let me take uh – South Korea as an example. I have personally told President Pack that the United States does not condone the kind of repressive measures that he has taken in that country. But I think in all fairness and equity we have to recognize the problem that South Korea has. On the north they have North Korea with five hundred thousand well-trained, well-equipped troops – they are supported by the People’s Republic of China; they are supported by the Soviet Union. South Korea faces a very delicate situation. Now the United States, in this case, this administration, has recommended a year ago and we have reiterated it again this year, that the United States, South Korea, North Korea and the uh – People’s Republic of China sit down at a conference table to resolve the problems of the Korean peninsula. This is a leadership role that the United States under this administration is carrying out, and if we do it, and I think the opportunities and the possibilities are getting better, we will have solved many of the internal domestic problems that exist in South Korea at the present time. The United States must and will maintain complete access to the Panama Canal. The United States must maintain a defense capability of the Panama Canal. And the United States will maintain our national security interest in the Panama Canal. The negotiations far the Panama Canal started under President Johnson and have continued up to the present time. I believe those negotiations should continue. But there are certain guidelines that must be followed, and I’ve just defined them. Let me take just a minute to comment on something that Governor Carter said. On non – nu- oh – uh – nonproliferation, in May of l975, I called for a conference of uh – nuclear suppliers. That conference has met six times. In May of this year, Governor Carter took the first initiative, approximately twelve months after I had taken my initiative a year ago. The White House did not uh – prevent the release of that report. On July twelfth of this year, we gave full permission for the release of that report. I was very disappointed in the fact that the uh – GAO released that report because I think it interjected political partisan politics at the present time. But let me comment on the report. Somebody who sits in Washington, D.C., eighteen months after the Mayaguez incident, can be a very good grandstand quarterback. And let me make another observation. This morning, I got a call from the skipper of the Mayaguez. He was furious because he told me that it was the action of me, President Ford, that saved the lives of the crew of the Mayaguez. And I can assure you that if we had not taken the strong and forceful action that we did, we would have been uh – criticized very, very uh – severely for sitting back and not moving. Captain Miller is thankful. The crew is thankful. We did the right thing. It seems to me that those who sit in Washington eighteen months after the incident are not the best judges of the decision-making process that had to be made by the National Security Council and by myself at the time the incident was developing in the Pacific. Let me assure you that we made every possible overture to the People’s Republic of China and through them to the Cambodian Government. We made uh – diplomatic uh – protests to the Cambodian government through the United Nations. Every possible diplomatic means was utilized. But at the same time, I had a responsibility, and so did the National Security Coun- Council, to meet the problem at hand. And we handled it responsibly and I think Captain Miller’s testimony to that effect is the best evidence. Again Governor Carter is inaccurate. The Arab boycott action was first taken in 1952. And in November of 1975 I was the first president to order the executive branch to take action, affirmative action, through the Department of Commerce and other cabinet departments, to make certain that no American businessman or business organization should discriminate against Jews because of an Arab boycott. And I might add that uh – my administration – and I’m very proud of it – is the first administration that has taken an antitrust action against companies in this country that have allegedly cooperated with the Arab boycott. Just on Monday of this week I signed a tax bill that included an amendment that would prevent companies in the United States from taking a tax deduction if they have in any way whatsoever cooperated with the Arab boycott. And last week when we were trying to get the Export Administration Act through the Congress – necessary legislation – my administration went to Capitol Hill and tried to convince the House and the Senate that we should have an amendment on that legislation which would take strong and effective action against those who uh – participate or cooperate with the Arab uh boycott. One other point. Because the Congress failed to act, I am going to announce tomorrow that the Department of Commerce will disclose those companies that have uh – participated in the Arab boycott. This is something that we can do; the Congress failed to do it, and we intend to do it. Let me restate uh – our policy. As long as Vietnam, North Vietnam, does not give us a full and complete accounting of our missing in action, I will never uh – go along with the admission of Vietnam to the United Nations. If they do give us a bona fide, complete uh – accounting of the eight hundred MIA’s, then I believe that the United States should begin negotiations for the uh – admission of Vietnam to the United Nations. But not until they have given us the full accounting of our MIAs. As we have seen tonight, foreign policy and defense policy are difficult and complex issues. We can debate methods, we can debate one decision or another, but there are two uh things which cannot be debated – experience and results. In the last two years, I have made policy decisions involving – long-range difficulties and policies and made day-to-day judgments not only as president of the United States but as the leader of the free world What is the result of that leadership? America is strong. America is free. America is respected. Not a single young American today is fighting or dying on any foreign battlefield. America is at peace and with freedom. Thank you, and good night.Mr. Kraft, I believe that the American people, in the next four years under a Ford administration, will be called upon to make those necessary sacrifices to preserve the peace which we have. Which means, of course, that uh – we will have to maintain an adequate military capability – which means, of course, that we will have to add a uh – I think uh – a few billion dollars to our defense appropriations to make certain that we have adequate uh -strategic forces – adequate conventional forces. I think the American people will be called upon to uh – uh – be in the forefront in giving leadership to the solution of those problems that must be solved in the Middle East, in southern Africa, and any problems that might arise in the Pacific. The American people will be called upon to tighten their belts a bit in meeting some of the problems that we face domestically. I don’t think that uh – America can go on a big spending spree with a whole lot of new programs uh – that would add significantly to the federal budget. I believe that the American people, if given the leadership that I would expect to give, would be willing to give this thrust to preserve the peace and the necessary restraint at home to hold the lid on spending so that we could, I think, have a long overdue and totally justified tax decrease for the middle-income people. And then, with the economy that would be generated from a restraint on spending, and a tax uh reduction primarily for the middle-income people, then I think the American people would be willing to make those sacrifices for peace and prosperity in the next uh – four years. Surely, surely, overlapping. Doesn’t your policy really imply that we’re going to have a fairly high rate of unemployment over a fairly long time, that growth is gonna be fairly slow, and that we’re not gonna be able to do much – very much in the next four or five years to meet the basic agenda of our national needs in the cities, in health, uh in transit and a whole lot of things like that. Not at all. overlapping, aren’t those the real costs? No, Mr. Kraft, we’re spending very significant amounts of money now, some $200 billion a year, almost 50 percent of our total federal expenditure uh – by the federal government at the present time for human needs. Now we will probably need to increase that to same extent. But we don’t have to have – growth in spending that will blow the lid off and add to the problems of inflation. I believe we can meet the problems within the cities of this country and still uh – give a tax reduction. I proposed, as you know, a reduction to increase the personal exemption from seven hundred and fifty to a thousand dollars. With the fiscal program that I have, and if you look at the projections, it shows that we will reduce unemployment, that we will continue to win the battle against inflation, and at the same time give the kind of quality of life that I believe is possible in America. Uh – a job, a home for all those that’ll work and save for it, uh – safety in the streets, uh – health that is a – health care that is affordable. These things can be done if we have the right vision and the right restraint and the right leadership. I believe that the uh – American people have been turned off in this election, uh – Mr. Maynard, for a variety of reasons. We have seen on Capitol Hill, in the Congress, uh – a great many uh – allegations of wrong-doing, of uh – alleged immorality, uh – those are very disturbing to the American people. They wonder how an elected representative uh – can serve them and participate in such activities uh – serving in the Congress of the United States. Yes, and I’m certain many, many Americans were turned off by the revelations of Watergate, a very, very uh – bad period of time in American political history. Yes, and thousands, maybe millions of Americans were turned off because of the uh – problems that came out of our involvement in Vietnam. But on the other hand, I found on July fourth of this year, a new spirit born in America. We were celebrating our Bicentennial; and I find that uh – there is a – a movement as I travel around the country of greater interest in this campaign. Now, like uh – any hardworking uh – person seeking public office uh – in the campaign, inevitably sometimes you will use uh – rather graphic language and I’m guilty of that just like I think most others in the political arena. But I do make a pledge that in the next ten days when we’re asking the American people to make one of the most important decisions in their lifetime, because I think this election is one of the mast vital in the history of America, that uh – we do together what we can to stimulate voter participation. Well, Mr. uh – Nelson, uh – I testified before two committees, House and Senate, on precisely the questions that you have asked. And the testimony under oath was to the effect that I did not talk to Mr. Nixon, to Mr. Haldeman, to Mr. Ehrlichman, or to any of the people at the White House. I said I had no recollection whatsoever of talking with any of the White House legislative liaison people. I indicated under oath that the initiative that I took was at the request of the ranking members of the House Banking and Currency Committee on the Republican side, which was a legitimate request and a proper response by me. Now that was gone into by two congressional committees, and following that investigation, both committees overwhelmingly approved me, and the House and the Senate did likewise. Now, in the meantime, the special prosecutor, within the last few days, after an investigation himself, said there was no reason for him to get involved because he found nothing that would justify it. And then just a day or two ago, the attorney general of the United States made a further investigation and came to precisely the same conclusion. Now, after all of those investigations by objective, responsible people, I think the matter is closed once and for all. But to add one other feature, I don’t control any of the tapes. Those tapes are in the jurisdiction of the courts and I have no right to say “yes” or “no.” But all the committees, the attorney general, the special prosecutor, all of them have given me a clean bill of health. I think the matter is settled once and for all. That’s for the uh – proper authorities who have control over those tapes to make that decision. I have given every bit of evidence, answered every question that’s as- been asked me by any senator or any member of the House. Plus the fact, that the special prosecutor, on his own initiation, and the attorney general on his initiation, the highest law enforcement official in this country, all of them have given me a clean bill of health. And I’ve told everything I know about it. I think the matter is settled once and for all. I firmly believe, uh – Mr. Kraft, that it’s unwise for a president to signal in advance what uh – options he might exercise if any uhh – international problem arose. I think we all recall with some sadness that at uh – the period of the nin- late nineteen forties, early nineteen fifties, there were some indications that the United States would not include uh – South Korea in an area of defense. There are some who allege, I can’t prove it true or untrue, that uh – such a statement uh – in effect invited the North Koreans to invade South Korea. It’s a fact they did. But no president of the United States, in my opinion, should signal in advance to a prospective enemy, what his uhh – decision might be or what option he might exercise. It’s far better for a person sitting in the White House uh – who has a number of options to make certain that the uh – other side, so to speak, doesn’t know precisely what you’re going to do. And therefore, that was the reason that I would not uh – identify any particular course of action uh – when I responded to a question a week or so ago. I have indicated to General Brown that uh – the words that he used in that interview, in that particular case and in several others, were very ill advised. And General Brown has indicated uh – his apology, his regrets, and I think that will, uh – in this situation, settle the matter. It is tragic that uh – the full transcript of that interview was not released and that there were excerpts, some of the excerpts, taken out of context. Not this one, however, that you bring up. General Brown has an exemply record of military performance. He served this nation with great, great skill and courage and bravery for thirty-five years. And I think it’s the consensus of the people who are knowledgeable in the military field, that he is probably the outstanding military leader and strategist that we have in America today. Now he did use uh – ill-advised words, but I think in the fact that he apologized, that he was reprimanded, uh – does permit him to stay on and continue that kind of leadership that’s we so badly need as we enter into uh – negotiations uh – under the SALT II agreement, or if we have operations that might be developing uh in the Middle East or southern Africa, in the Pacific, uh – we need a man with that experience, that knowledge, that know-how, and I think, in light of the fact that he has uh – apologized, uh – would not have justified my asking for his resignation. The Governor may not have heard my uh – established criteria for the selection of a vice president, but uh – it was a well-established criteria that the person I selected would be fully qualified to be president of the United States. And Senator Bob Dole is so qualified: sixteen years in the House of Representatives and in the Senate, uhh – very high responsibilities on important committees. I don’t mean to be critical of uh – Senator Mondale, but uh – I was uh – very, very surprised when I read that uh – Senator Mondale made a very derogatory, very personal comment about General Brown uh – after the news story that uh – broke about General Brown. If my recollection is correct he indicated that uh – General Brown was not qualified to be a sewer commissioner. I don’t think that’s a proper way to describe aayuh- chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff who has fought for his country for thirty-five years, and I’m sure the governor would agree with me on that. Uh – I think Senator Dole would show more good judgment and discretion than to so describe uh – a heroic and brave and very outstanding leader of the military. So I think our selection uh – of Bob Dole as vice president uh – is based on merit. And if he should ever become uh – the president of the United States, with his vast experience as member the House and a member of the Senate, as well as a vice president, I think he would do an outstanding job as president of the United States. That’s a tribute to their interest in this election. Well, first, uh – let me set the record straight. I vetoed the strip-mining bill, Mr. Kraft, because it was the overwhelming consensus of knowledgeable people that that strip-mining bill would have meant the loss of literally uh – thousands of jobs, something around a hundred and forty thousand jabs. Number two, that strip-mining bill would’ve severely set back our need for more coal, and Governor Carter has said repeatedly that coal is the resource that we need to use more in the effort to become independent of the uh – Arab oil supply. So, I vetoed it because of a loss of jobs and because it would’ve interfered with our energy independence program. The auto emissions – uh – it was agreed by Leonard Woodcock, the head of the UAW, and by the uh – heads of all of the automobile industry, we had labor and management together saying that those auto emission standards had to be modified. But let’s talk about what the Ford administration has done in the field of environment. I have increased, as president, by over 60 percent the funding for water treatment plants in the United States, the federal contribution. I have fully funded the land and water conservation program; in fact, have recommended and the Congress approved a substantially increased land and water conservation program. Uh – I have uh – added in the current year budget the funds for the National Park Service. For example, we uh – proposed about $12 million to add between four and five hundred more employees for the National Park Service. And a month or so ago I did uh – likewise say over the next ten years we should expand – double – this national parks, the wild wilderness areas, the scenic river areas. And then, of course, the – the final thing is that I have signed and approved of more scenic rivers, more wilderness areas, since I’ve been president than any other president in the history of the United States. Let me uh – speak out very strongly. The Ford administration does have a very comprehensive program to help uh – our major metropolitan areas. I fought for, and the Congress finally went along with a general revenue sharing program, whereby cities and uh – states, uh – the cities two-thirds and the states one-third, get over six billion dollars a year in cash through which they can uh – provide many, many services, whatever they really want. In addition we uh – in the federal government make available to uh – cities about uh – three billion three hundred million dollars in what we call community development. In adesh- in addition, uh – uh – as a result of my pressure an the Congress, we got a major mass transit program uh – over a four-year period, eleven billion eight-hundred million dollars. We have a good housing program, uh – that uh – will result in cutting uh – the down payments by 50 percent and uh – having mortgage payments uh lower at the beginning of any mortgage period. We’re expanding our homestead uh – housing program. The net result is uh – we think under Carla Hills, who’s the chairman of my uh – urban development and uh – neighborhood revitalization program, we will really do a first-class job in helping uh – the communities throughout the country. As a matter of fact, that committee under Secretary Hills released about a seventy-five-page report with specific recommendations so we can do a better job uh – the weeks ahead. And in addition, the tax program of the Ford administration, which provides an incentive for industry to move into our major uh – metropolitan areas, into the inner cities, will bring jobs where people are, and help to revitalize those cities as they can be. Let me say at the outset, uh – I’m very proud of the record of this administration. In the cabinet I have one of the outstanding, I think, administrators as the secretary of transportation, Bill Coleman. You’re familiar, I’m sure, with the recognition given in the Air Force to uh – General James, and there was just uh – approved a three-star admiral, the first in the history of the United States Navy, so uh – we are giving full recognition to individuals of quality in the Ford administration in positions of great responsibility. In addition, uh – the Department of Justice is fully enforcing, and enforcing effectively, the Voting Rights Act, the legislation that involves jobs, housing for minorities, not only blacks but all others. Uh – the Department of uh – uh – HUD is enforcing the new legislation that uhh – outlaws, that takes care of redlining. Uh – what we’re doing is saying that there are opportunities, business opportunities, educational opportunities, responsibilities uh – where people with talent, black or any other minority, can fully qualify. The Office of Minority Business in the Department of Commerce has made available more money in trying to help uh – black businessmen or other minority businessmen than any other administration since the office was established. The Office of Small Business, under Mr. Kobelinski, has a very massive program trying to help the black community. The individual who wants to start a business or expand his business as a black businessman is able to borrow, either directly or with guaranteed loans. I believe on the record that this administration has been more responsive and we have carried out the law to the letter, and I’m proud of the record. support the uh – Republican uh – platform, which calls for the constitutional amendment that would uh – outlaw abortions. I favor the particular constitutional amendment that would turn over to the states the uh – individual right to the voters in those states uh – the chance to make a decision by public referendum. Uh I call that the people amendment. I think if you really believe that the people of a state ought to make a decision on a matter of this kind that uh – we ought to have a federal constitutional amendment that would permit each one of the fifty states to make the choice. Uh – I think this is a responsible and a proper way to proceed. Uhh – I believe also that uh – there is some merit to a – an amendment that uh – uh – Senator Everett Dirksen uh – proposed very frequently, an amendment that would uh – change the court decision as far as voluntary prayer in public schools. Uh – it seems to me that there should have – be an opportunity, uh – as long as it’s voluntary, as long as there is no uh – compulsion whatsoever, that uh – an individual ought to have that right. So in those two cases I think uh – such uh – a constitutional amendment would be proper, and I really don’t think in either case they’re trivial matters. I think they’re matters of very deep conviction, as far as many, many people in this country believe. And therefore, they shouldn’t be treated lightly. But they’re matters that are ah – important. And in those two cases, I would favor them. Uh – Mr. Maynard, uh – the record of gun control, whether it’s one city or another or in some states, does not show that the registration of a gun, handgun, or the registration of the gun owner, has in any way whatsoever decreased the crime rate or the use of that gun in the committing of a crime. The record just doesn’t prove that such legislation or action by a local city council is effective. What we have to do, and this is the crux of the matter, is to make it very, very uh – difficult for a person who uses a gun in the commission of a crime to stay out of jail. If we make the use of a gun in the commission. of a crime a serious criminal offense, and that person is prosecuted, then, in my opinion, we are going after the person who uses the gun for the wrong reason. I don’t believe in the registration of handguns or the registration of the handgun owner. That has not proven to be effective, and therefore, I think the better way is to go after the criminal, the individual who commits a crime in the possession of a gun and uses that gun for a part of his criminal activity. Those are the people who ought to be in jail. And the only way to do it is to pass strong legislation so that once apprehended, indicted, convicted, they’ll be in jail and off the streets and not using guns in the commission of a crime. Yes, I have. And uh – the individuals that uh – with whom I’ve consulted have not uh – convinced me that uh – a national registration of handguns or handgun owners will solve the problem you’re talking about. The person who wants to use a gun for an illegal purpose can get it whether it’s registered or outlawed. They will be obtained. And they are the people who ought to go behind bars. You should not in the process penalize the legitimate handgun owner. And when you go through the process of registration, you in effect, are penalizing that individual who uses his gun for a very legitimate purpose. Well, I think the answer uh – as to the kind of person that I would select uh – is obvious. I had one opportunity to nominate uh – an individual to the Supreme Court and I selected the Circuit Court of Appeals judge from Illinois, uh – John Paul Stevens. I selected him because of his outstanding record as a Circuit Court of Appeals Judge, and I was very pleased that uh – an overwhelming Democratic United States Senate, after going into his background, came to the conclusion that he was uh – fit and should serve, and the vote in his behalf was overwhelming. So, I would say somebody in the format of uh – Justice Stevens would be the kind of an individual that I would uh – select in the future, as I did him in the past. I uh – believe, however, a comment ought to be made about the direction of the uh – Burger Court, vis-a-vis the uh – court uh – that preceded it. It seems to me that the Miranda case was a case that really made it very, very difficult for the – uh police, the law enforcement people in this country to uh – do what they could to make certain that the victim of a crime was protected and that those that commit crimes uh – were properly handled and uh – sent to jail. The Miranda case, uh – the Burger Court uh – is gradually changing, and I’m pleased to see that there are some steps being made by the uh – Burger Court to modify the so-called Miranda decision. Uh – I might make a correction uh – of what uh – Governor Carter said, uh speaking of uh – uh – gun control, uh – yes, it is true, I believe that the sale of uh – Saturday Night S- Specials should be cut out, but he wants the registration of handguns. Well, Mr. Kraft, uh – I violently disagree with your assessment. And I don’t think the record justifies the conclusion that you come to. Uh – let me uh – talk about uh – the economic announcements that were made just this past week. Yes, it was announced that the uh – GNP real growth in the third quarter was at 4 percent. But do you realize that over the last ten years that’s a higher figure than the average growth during that ten-year period? Now it’s lower than the nine-point-point-two percent growth in the first quarter, and it’s lower than the uh 5 percent growth in the second quarter. But every economist – liberal, conservative that I’m familiar with – recognizes that in the fourth quarter of this year and in the fifth quar- uh – the first quarter of next year that we’ll have an increase in real GNP. But now let’s talk about the pluses that came out this week. We had an 18 percent increase in housing starts. We had a substantial increase in new permits for housing. As a matter of fact, based on the announcement this week, there will be at an annual rate of a million, eight hundred and some thousand new houses built, which is a tremendous increase over last year and a substantial increase over the earlier part of this year. Now in addition, we had a very – some very good news in the reduction in the rate of inflation. And inflation hits everybody: those who are working and those who are on welfare. The rate of inflation, as announced just the other day, is under 5 percent; and the uh – 4.4 percent that was indicated at the time of the 4 percent GNP was less than the 5.4 percent. It means that the American buyer is getting a better bargain today because inflation is less. Uh Mr. Kraft, uh – I think the record can be put in this uh – in this way, which uh – is the way that I think satisfies most Americans. Since the depths of the recession, we have added four million jobs. Im- most importantly, consumer confidence as surveyed by the reputable organization at the University of Michigan is at the highest since 1972. In other words, there is a growing public confidence in the strength of this economy. And that means that there will be more industrial activity. It means that there will be a reduction in the uhh – unemployment. It means that there will be increased hires. It means that there will be increased employment. Now we’ve had this pause, but most economists, regardless of their political philosophy, uh – indicate that this pause for a month or two was healthy, because we could not have honestly sustained a 9.2 percent rate of growth which we had in the first quarter of this year. Now, uh – I’d like to point out as well that the United States’ economic recovery from the recession of a year ago is well ahead of the economic recovery of any major free industrial nation in the world today. We’re ahead of all of the Western European country. We’re ahead of Japan. The United States is leading the free world out of the recession that was serious a year, year and a half ago. We’re going to see unemployment going down, more jobs available, and the rate of inflation going down. And I think this is a record that uh – the American people understand and will appreciate. I think uh – the uh – increase and the uh – prospects as far as I’m concerned and the I – less favorable prospects for Governor Carter, reflect that Governor Carter uh – is inconsistent in many of the positions that he takes. He tends to distort on a number of occasions. Uh – just a moment ago, for example, uh – he uh – was indicating that uh – uh – in the 1950s, for example, uh – unemployment was very low. He fails to point out that uh – in the 1950s we were engaged in the war in Vietnam. We – I mean in Korea – we had uh – three million five hundred thousand young men uh – in the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marines. That’s not the way to end unemployment or to reduce unemployment. At the present time we’re at peace. We have reduced the number of people in the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marines from three million, one hundred – three million, five hundred thousand to two mil- lion one hundred thousand. We are not at war. We have reduced the military manpower by a million four hundred thousand. If we had that many more people in the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and Marines, our unemployment figure would be considerably less. But this administration doesn’t believe the way to reduce unemployment is to go to war, or to increase the number of people in the military. So you cannot compare unemployment, as you sought to, uh – with the present time with the 1950s, because the then administration had people in the military – they were at war, they were fighting overseas, and this administration has reduced the size of the military by a million four hundred thousand. They’re in the civilian labor market and they’re not fighting anywhere around the world today. For twenty-five years I served in the Congress under five presidents. I saw them work, I saw them make very hard decisions. I didn’t always agree with their decisions, whether they were Democratic or Republican presidents. For the last two years, I’ve been the president, and I have found from experience that it’s much more difficult to make those decisions than it is to second-guess them. I became president at the time that the United States was in a very troubled time. We had inflation of over 12 percent, we were on the brink of the worst recession in the last forty years, we were still deeply involved in the problems of Vietnam. The American people had lost faith and trust and confidence in the presidency itself. That uh – situation called for me to first put the United States on a steady course and to keep our keel well balanced, because we had to face the difficult problems that had all of a sudden hit America. I think most people know that I did not seek the presidency. But I am asking for your help and assistance to be president for the next four years. During this campaign we’ve seen a lot of television shows, a lot of bumper stickers, and a great many uh – slogans of one kind or another. But those are not the things that count. What counts is, that the United States celebrated its 200th birthday on July fourth. As a result of that wonderful experience all over the United States, there is a new spirit in America. The American people are healed, are working together. The American people are moving again, and moving in the right direction. We have cut inflation by better than half. We have came out of the recession and we’re well on the road to real prosperity in this country again. There has been a restoration of faith and confidence and trust in the presidency because I’ve been open, candid and forthright. I have never promised more than I could produce and I have produced everything that I promised. We are at peace. Not a single young American is fighting or dying on any foreign soil tonight. We have peace with freedom. I’ve been proud to be president of the United States during these very troubled times. I love America just as all of you love America. It would be the highest honor for me to have your support on November second and for you to say, “Jerry Ford, you’ve done a good job, keep on doing it.” Thank you, and good night.