October 6, 1996
The First Clinton-Dole Presidential Debate
LEHRER: Good evening from the Bushnell Theatre in Hartford, Connecticut. I’m Jim Lehrer of the News Hour on PBS. Welcome to the first of the 1996 Presidential debates between President Bill Clinton, the Democratic nominee, and Senator Bob Dole, the Republican nominee. This event is sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates. It will last 90 minutes following a format and rules worked out by the two campaigns.
There will be two-minute opening and closing statements. In between, a series of questions, each having three parts. A 90-second answer, a 60-second rebuttal, and a 30-second response. I will assist the candidates in adhering to those time limits with the help of a series of lights visible to both.
Under their rules, the candidates are not allowed to question each other directly. I will ask the questions. There are no limitations on the subjects.
The order for everything tonight was determined by coin toss. Now, to the opening statements and to President Clinton. Mr. President.
CLINTON: Thank you, Jim. And thank you to the people of Hartford, our hosts.
I want to begin by saying again how much I respect Senator Dole and his record of public service and how hard I will try to make this campaign and this debate one of ideas, not insults.
Four years ago I ran for president at a time of high unemployment and rising frustration. I wanted to turn this country around with a program of opportunity for all, responsibility from all, and an American community where everybody has a role to play. I wanted a government that was smaller and less bureaucratic to help people make the most of their own lives. Four years ago you took me on faith. Now there’s a record: Ten and a half million more jobs, rising incomes, falling crime rates and welfare rolls, a strong America at peace.
We are better off than we were four years ago. Let’s keep it going. We cut the deficit by 60 percent. Now, let’s balance the budget and protect Medicare, Medicaid, education and the environment. We cut taxes for 15 million working Americans. Now let’s pass the tax cuts for education and child rearing, help with medical emergencies, and buying a home.
We passed family and medical leave. Now let’s expand it so more people can succeed as parents and in the work force. We passed 100,000 police, the assault weapons ban, the Brady Bill. Now let’s keep going by finishing the work of putting the police on the street and tackling juvenile gangs.
We passed welfare reform. Now let’s move a million people from welfare to work. And most important, let’s make education our highest priority so that every eight-year-old will be able to read, every 12-year-old can log onto the Internet, every 18-year-old can go to college. We can build that bridge to the 21st Century. And I look forward to discussing exactly how we’re going to do it.
LEHRER: Senator Dole, two minutes.
DOLE: Thank you. Thank you, Mr. President, for those kind words. Thank the people of Hartford, the Commission, and all those out here who may be listening or watching.
It’s a great honor for me to be here standing here as the Republican nominee. I’m very proud to be the Republican nominee reaching out to Democrats and Independents.
I have three very special people with me tonight: My wife, Elizabeth; my daughter, Robin, who has never let me down, and a fellow named Frank Carafa from New York, along with Ollie Manninen who helped me out in the mountains of Italy a few years back.
I’ve learned from them that people do have tough times. And sometimes you can’t go it alone. And that’s what America is all about.
I remember getting my future back from doctors and nurses and a doctor in Chicago named Dr. Kalikian . And ever since that time, I’ve tried to give something back to my country, to the people who are watching us tonight.
America is the greatest place on the face of the earth. Now, I know millions of you still have anxieties. You work harder and harder to make ends meet and put food on the table. You worry about the quality and the safety of your children, and the quality of education. But even more importantly, you worry about the future and will they have the same opportunities that you and I have had.
And Jack Kemp and I want to share with you some ideas tonight. Jack Kemp is my running mate, doing an outstanding job. Now, I’m a plain-speaking man and I learned long ago that your word was your bond. And I promise you tonight that I’ll try to address your concerns and not try to exploit them. It’s a tall order, but I’ve been running against the odds for a long time and, again, I’m honored to be here this evening.
LEHRER: Mr. President, first question. There is a major difference in your view of the role of the Federal government and that of Senator Dole. How would you define the difference?
CLINTON: Well, Jim, I believe that the Federal government should give people the tools and try to establish the conditions in which they can make the most of their own lives. That, to me, is the key. And that leads me to some different conclusions from Senator Dole.
For example, we have reduced the size of the Federal government to its smallest size in 30 years. We reduced more regulations, eliminated more programs than my two Republican predecessors. But I have worked hard for things like the Family and Medical Leave Law, the Brady Bill, the assault weapons ban, the program to put 100,000 police on the street. All of these are programs that Senator Dole opposed that I supported, because I felt they were a legitimate effort to help people make the most of their own lives. I’ve worked hard to help families impart values to their own children. I supported the V-chip so that parents would be able to control what their kids watch on television when they’re young, along with the ratings systems for television and educational television. I supported strong action against the tobacco companies to stop the marketing, advertising, and sale of tobacco to young people. I supported a big increase in the safe and drug-free schools program. These were areas on which Senator Dole and I differed, but I believed they were the right areas for America to be acting together as one country to help individuals and families make the most of their own lives and raise their kids with good values and a good future.
LEHRER: Senator Dole, one minute.
DOLE: I think the basic difference is, and I have had some experience in this, I think the basic difference, I trust the people. The President trusts the government. We go back and look at the healthcare plan that he wanted to impose on the American people. One seventh the total economy, 17 new taxes, price controls, 35 to 50 new bureaucracies that cost $1.5 trillion. Don’t forget that, that happened in 1993. A tax increase, a tax on everybody in America. Not just the rich. If you made 25,000 as the original proposal, you got your Social Security taxes increased. We had a BTU tax we turned into a $35 million gas tax, a $265 billion tax increase.
I guess I rely more on the individual. I carry a little card in my pocket called the Tenth Amendment. Where possible, I want to give power back to the states and back to the people. That’s my difference with the President. We’ll have specific differences later. He noted a few, but there are others.
LEHRER: Mr. President, 30 seconds.
CLINTON: I trust the people. We’ve done a lot to give the people more powers to make their own decisions over their own lives. But I do think we are right when we try to, for example, give mothers and newborns 48 hours before they can be kicked out of the hospital, ending these drive-by deliveries.
I think we were right to pass the Kassebaum-Kennedy bill, which says you can’t lose your health insurance just because you change jobs or because someone in your family’s been sick. Our government is smaller and less bureaucratic and has given more authority to the states than its two predecessors under Republican presidents. But I do believe we have to help our people get ready to succeed in the 21st Century.
LEHRER: Senator Dole, the President said in his opening statement we are better off today than we were four years ago. Do you agree?
DOLE: Well, he’s better off than he was four years ago.
CLINTON: I agree with that. That’s right.
DOLE: And I may be better off four years from now, but I don’t know. I looked at the slowest growth in the century. He inherited a growth of 4.7 4.8 percent, now it’s down to about 2.4 percent. We’re going to pass a million bankruptcies this year for the first time in history. We’ve got stagnant wages. In fact, women’s wages have dropped 2.2 percent. Men’s wages haven’t gone up, gone down. So we have stagnation.
We have the highest foreign debt in history. And it seems to me that if you take a look, are you better off? Well, I guess some may be better off. Saddam Hussein is probably better off than he was four years ago. Renee Proval (ph) is probably better off than he was four years ago. But are the American people? They’re working harder and higher and harder paying more taxes. For the first time in history, you pay about 40 percent of what you earn. More than you spend for food, clothing and shelter combined for taxes under this administration. So some may be better off.
They talk about family income being up. That’s not true in Connecticut, family income is down. And it’s up in some cases because both parents are working. One works for the family, and one works to pay taxes for the government. We’re going to give them tax cuts so they can spend more time with their children, maybe even take a vacation. That’s what America is all about.
LEHRER: One minute, Mr. President.
CLINTON: Well, let me say, first of all, in February Senator Dole acknowledged that the American economy was in the best shape it’s been in in 30 years. We have ten and a half million more jobs, a faster job growth rate than under any Republican administration since the 1920s. Wages are goings up for the first time in a decade. We have record numbers of new small businesses. We have the biggest drop in the number of people in poverty in 27 years. All groups of people are growing. We had the biggest drop in income inequality in 27 years in 1995.
The average family’s income has gone up over $1600 just since our economic plan passed. So I think it’s clear that we’re better off than we were four years ago. Now we need to focus on what do we need to do to be better off still. How can we help people as we are to get their retirements when they work for small businesses, to be able to afford health insurance, to be able to educate their children. That’s what I want to focus on. But we are clearly better off than we were four years ago, as Senator Dole acknowledged this year.
LEHRER: Senator Dole.
DOLE: I doubt that I acknowledged that this year. But in any event, I think we just look at the facts. We ask the people that are viewing tonight, are you better off than you were four years ago. It’s not whether we’re better off, it’s whether they’re better off.
Are you working harder to put food on the table, feed your children. Are your children getting a better education. Drug use has doubled the past 44 months all across America. Crime has gone down but it’s because the mayors like Rudy Giuliani where one third of the drop happened in one city, New York City.
So, yes, some may be better off. But of the people listening tonight, the working families who will benefit from economic packages, they’ll be better off when Bob Dole is president and Jack Kemp is vice president.
LEHRER: Mr. President, Senator Dole has come pretty close in the last few days to accusing you of lying about his position on Medicare reform. Have you done so?
CLINTON: Absolutely not. Let’s look at the position. First of all, remember that in this campaign season, since Senator Dole’s been a candidate, he has bragged about the fact that he voted against Medicare in the beginning, in 1965, one of only 12 members. He said he did the right thing then, he knew it wouldn’t work at the time. That’s what he said.
Then his budget that he passed along with Speaker Gingrich cut Medicare $270 billion, more than was necessary to repair the Medicare trust fund. It would have charged seniors more for out-of-pocket costs as well as more in premiums because doctors could have charged them more. The American Medical, Hospital Association, the Nurses Association, the Catholic Hospital Association all said hundreds of hospitals could close and people would be hurt badly under the Dole-Gingrich Medicare plan that I vetoed.
And now with this risky $550 billion tax scheme of Senator Dole’s, even his own friends, his campaign co-chair, Senator D’Amato, says that they can’t possibly pay for it without cutting Medicare more and cutting Social Security as well, according to him.
Now, my balanced budget plan adds ten years to the life of the Medicare trust fund, ten years. And we’ll have time to deal with the long-term problems of the baby boomers. But it was simply wrong to finance their last scheme to cut Medicare $270 billion to run the risk of it withering on the vine. We always had to reform it over the years, but we need somebody who believes it in to reform it.
LEHRER: Senator Dole.
DOLE: Well, I must say, I look back at the vote on Medicare in 1965, we had a program called Eldercare that also provided drugs and means tests to people who needed medical attention received it. I thought it was a good program. But I’ve supported Medicare ever since.
In fact, I used to go home, my mother would tell me, Bob, all I’ve got is my Social Security and my Medicare, don’t cut it. I wouldn’t violate anything my mother said. In fact, we had a conversation about our mothers one day, a very poignant conversation in the White House. I’m concerned about healthcare. I’ve had the best healthcare from government hospitals, Army hospitals and I know its importance, but we’ve got to fix it. It’s his trustees, the President’s trustees, not mine, who says it’s going to go broke. He doesn’t fix it for ten years. We ought to appoint a commission, just as we did in Social Security in 1983, when we rescued Social Security, and I was proud to be on that commission, along with Claude Pepper, the champion of senior citizens from Florida. And we can do it again, if we take politics out of it. Stop scaring the seniors, Mr. President. You’ve already spent $45 million scaring seniors and tearing me apart. I think it’s time to have a truce.
LEHRER: Mr. President.
CLINTON: Well, let me say, first of all, I’d be happy to have a commission deal with this and I appreciate what Senator Dole did on the ’83 Social Security commission. But it won’t be possible to do, if his tax scheme passes because even his own campaign co-chair, Senator D’Amato, says he’ll have to cut Medicare even more than was cut in the bill that I vetoed. I vetoed that bill because it cut more Medicare and and basically ran the risk of breaking up the system. My balanced budget plan puts ten years on the Medicare. We ought to do that, then we can have a commission. But Senator Dole’s plans are not good for the country.
LEHRER: Senator Dole, speaking of your tax plan, do you still think that’s a good idea, the 15 percent across the board tax cut?
DOLE: Oh, yes. And you’ll be eligible.
CLINTON: Me too?
DOLE: And so will the former President, yes.
CLINTON: I need it.
DOLE: Well, the people need it, that’s the point. This is not a Wall Street tax cut. This is a family tax cut. This is a Main Street tax cut, 15 percent across — let’s take a family making $30,000 a year, that’s $1261. Now, maybe to some in this Bushnell Memorial that it’s not a lot of money, but people watching tonight with a couple of kids, a working family, that’s four or five months of day care, maybe a personal computer; it’s may be three or four months of mortgage payments. This economic package is about families but it’s a six-point package. First of all, it’s a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution which President Clinton defeated. He twisted arms and got six Democrats to vote the other way, but we lost by one vote. It’s balancing a budget by the year 2002. It’s a tax cut, cutting capital gains 50 percent. So you can go out and create more jobs and more opportunities. It’s a state tax relief. It’s a $500 per child tax credit. It’s about litigation reforms.
Now that the President gets millions of dollars from the trial lawyers, he probably doesn’t like this provision. In fact, when I fell off the podium in Chico, before I lit the ground, hit the ground I had call on my cell phone from a trial lawyer saying I think we’ve got a case here. And it’s also regulatory reform. It’s a good package, Mr. President. We’d like to have your support.
LEHRER: Mr. President.
CLINTON: Well, here’s the problem with it: It sounds very good, but there’s a reason that 500 economists, including seven Nobel prize winners and business periodicals like Business Week, and even Senator Dole’s friends, Senator Warren Rudman, former Republican senator from New Hampshire, says it’s not a practical program. It’s a $550 billion tax scheme that will cause a big hole in the deficit which will raise interest rates and slow down the economy and cause people to pay more for home mortgages, car payments, credit card payments, college loans, and small business loans. It’s not good to raise the deficit. We worked too hard to lower it. It will actually raise taxes on nine million people and, in addition to that, it will force bigger cuts in Medicare, Medicaid, education and the environment than the ones that he and Mr. Gingrich passed that I vetoed last year. So it sounds great, but our targeted tax cut for education, child rearing, healthcare and home buying, which is paid for in my balanced budget plan, something that he has not done, certified by the Congressional budget office, that’s the right way to go.
DOLE: The President wants to increase spending 20 percent over the next six years. I want to increase spending 14 percent, that’s how simple it is. I want the government to pinch pennies for a change instead of the American families. We’re talking about six percentage points over six years, and with that money you give it back to the working people. You also provide opportunity scholarships so low income parents will have the same choice that others have in sending their children to better schools. It will work, and when it does work, Mr. President, I know you’ll congratulate me.
LEHRER: Mr. President, the Senator mentioned trial lawyers and campaign, that means campaign financing. How do you personally avoid being unduly influenced by people who give you money or give you services in your campaigns?
CLINTON: Well, I try to articulate my positions as clearly as possible, tell people what I stand for and let them decide whether they’re going to support me or not.
The Senator mentioned the trial lawyers. In the case of the product liability bill, which they passed and I vetoed, I think that’s what he’s talking about, I actually wanted to sign that bill. And I told the people exactly what the Congress exactly what kind of bill I would sign. Now, a lot of the trial lawyers didn’t want me to sign any bill at all, but I had thought we ought to do what we could to cut frivolous lawsuits, but they wouldn’t make some of the changes that I thought should be made.
Now, let me just give you an example. I had a person in the Oval Office who lost a child in a school bus accident where a drunk driver caused the accident directly, but there were problems with the school bus. The drunk driver had no money. Under the new bill, if I had signed it, a person like that could never have had any recovery. I thought that was wrong. So I gave four or five specific examples to the Congress and said, prove to me that these people could recover but we’re going to eliminate frivolous lawsuits, I’ll sign the bill. But generally I believe that a president has to be willing to do what he thinks is right. I’ve done a lot of things that were controversial. My economic plan, my trade position, Bosnia, Haiti, taking on the NRA for the first time, taking on the tobacco companies for the first time. Sometimes you just have to do that because you know it’s right for the country over the long run. That’s what I’ve tried to do and that’s what I will continue to do as president.
LEHRER: Senator Dole.
DOLE: How does he avoid conflict? Well, I don’t know in the case of the trial lawyers. I look at the trial lawyers, and when you’re a few million short, you run out to Hollywood and pick up two to four million and organized labor comes to Washington, D.C. and puts 35 million into the pot. Now, if these aren’t special interests, I’ve got a lot to learn. I was there for a while before I left on June the 11th. The trial lawyers and I don’t — you know, my wife’s a lawyer. We’re the only two lawyers in Washington that trust each other. But we’re lawyers, I like lawyers. I don’t dislike trial lawyers. But it seemed to me there’s got to be some end to the frivolous lawsuits and there’s got to be some cap on punitive damage. You’re putting a lot of business people out of business. Small businessmen and businesswomen who paid 70 percent of your ninteen , your$265 billion tax increase, the largest tax increase in the history of America. I said that one day and Pat Moynihan, a Democrat, say, no, he said, in the history of the world. So I modified it, the largest tax increase in the history of the world. And it seems to me that there is a problem there, Mr. President. And I will address you as Mr. President. You didn’t do that with Mr. with President Bush in 1992.
LEHRER: Mr. President.
CLINTON: Let me say, first of all, I signed a tort reform bill that dealt with civilian aviation a couple of years ago. I proved that I will sign reasonable tort reform. Secondly, Senator Dole had some pretty harsh comments about special interest money, but it wasn’t me who opposed what we tried to do to save the lives of children who were subject to tobacco and then went to the tobacco growers and bragged about standing up for the Federal government when we tried to stop the advertising, marketing, and sales of tobacco to children. And it wasn’t me that let the polluters actually come into the halls of Congress, into the rooms, and rewrite the environmental laws. That’s what Speaker Gingrich and Senator Dole did, not me.
DOLE: That’s not true.
CLINTON: So I believe that we should take a different approach to this and talk about how we stand on the issues instead of trying to characterize each other’s motivations. I think Senator Dole and I just honestly disagree.
LEHRER: Well, Senator Dole, let me ask you the same question I asked the President: How do you avoid being influenced by people who contribute money and services to your campaigns?
DOLE: I think it’s very difficult. Let’s be honest about it. That’s why we need campaign finance reform. That’s why I reach out to the Perot voters. We’ve done about all, we are the reform party, the Republican Party. And the Perot voters that are looking for a home ought to take a look at the Republican record. Whatever it is, whatever the checklist was in ’92, it’s all done with campaign finance reform. I worked with Senator Mitchell, who played me, I guess, in the debate warmup. We tried six or eight years ago. He appointed three people, I appointed three people to get campaign finance reform. We couldn’t get it done, because I wasn’t enforceable.
You’ve suggested a commission, Newt Gingrich did, I suggested that at least four or five years ago. We have a commission on campaign finance reform. They send it to Congress, and we have to vote it up or down. That’s how it works. We are never going to fix it by the parties, because Democrats want a better advantage for themselves, we want a better advantage as Republicans, and that’s not how it’s going to work.
But I want to touch on this is tobacco thing. I know the President’s been puffing a lot on that. But I want to go back to 1965. That was my first vote against tobacco companies when I said we ought to label cigarettes. And I’ve had a consistent record ever since 1965. We passed a bill in 1992 that encouraged the states to adopt programs to stop kids from smoking. All 50 states did it. It took three and a half years. It wasn’t until election year, Mr. President, that you ever thought about stopping smoking.
What about drugs that have increased, doubled in the last 44 months? Cocaine is up 141 percent — marijuana, cocaine up 166 percent. It seems to me that you have a selective memory. You know, mine doesn’t work that way. So I just want to try to correct it as we go along.
CLINTON: Mr. Lehrer, I hope we’ll have a chance to discuss drugs later in the program. But let me respond to what you said. I agree that too many incumbent politicians in Washington in both parties have consistently opposed campaign finance reform. That was certainly the case from the minute I got there. So after Speaker Gingrich and Senator Dole took over the Congress, I went to New Hampshire and a man suggested — a gentleman that unfortunately just passed away a couple of days ago, suggested that we appoint a commission. And I shook hands with him on it and I appointed my members, and the commission never met. And then Senator Dole’s ardent supporters, Senator McCain, who’s out there today, along with Senator Feingold, supported, sponsored a campaign finance reform proposal. I strongly supported it. And members of Senator Dole’s own party in the Senate killed it. And he was not out there urging them to vote for the McCain-Feingold bill. So I think the American people, including the Perot supporters, know that I have had a consistent record in favor of campaign finance reform, and I will continue to have. And I hope we can finally get it in the next session of Congress, because we need it badly.
LEHRER: Senator Dole, 30 seconds.
DOLE: Well, on campaign reform itself, we’re going to get it when we have a bipartisan commission, take it out of politics. Get people who don’t have any interest in politics but understand the issue and let them make the recommendation to Congress. Now, we’re now kidding anybody, Mr. President. These are sophisticated people watching tonight. Millions and millions of Americans. They know the Republican Party hasn’t done it. They know the Democratic party won’t do it. We ought to agree that somebody else should do it. And we have to vote it up or down, Mr. President.
LEHRER: Mr. President, the Senator mentioned drugs. He suggested that you are — you bear some responsibility for the rise in drug use of teenagers in the United States. Is he right?
CLINTON: Well, Jim, I think every American in any position of responsibility should be concerned about what’s happened. I am. But let’s look at the overall record. Overall in America cocaine use has dropped 30 percent in the last four years, casual drug use down 13 percent. The tragedy is that our young people are still increasing their use of drugs up to about 11 percent total with marijuana, and I regret it. Let me tell you what I tried to do about it. I appointed a four-star general who led our efforts south of the border to keep drugs from coming into the country as our nation’s drug czar. The most heavily directed, decorated solder in uniform when he retired. We submitted the biggest drug budget ever. We have dramatically increased control and enforcement at the border. We supported a a crime bill that had 60 death penalties including, including the death penalty for drug kingpins. And I supported a big expansion in safe and drug-free schools program to support things like the DARE program because I thought all those things were very important. Do I think that I bear some responsibility for the fact that too many of our children still don’t understand drugs are wrong, drugs can kill you. Even though I have consistently opposed the legalization of drugs all my public life and worked hard against them. I think we all do. And I hope we can do better. I don’t think this issue should be politicized because my record is clear and I don’t think Senator Dole supports using using drugs. I think we just have to continue to work on this until those who think it isn’t dangerous and won’t kill them and won’t destroy their lives, get the message and change.
LEHRER: Senator.
DOLE: Again, well it’s, you are very selective, Mr. President. You don’t want to politicize drugs, but it’s already politicized Medicare, go out and scare senior citizens and other vulnerable groups, veterans and people who get Pell Grants and things like this. I mean, you say we’ve done all these bad things, which isn’t the case. But it seems to me the record is clear. The record is pretty clear in Arkansas, when you were governor. Drug use doubled. You resisted the appointment of a drug czar there because you thought it might interfere with treatment. But here you cut the drug czar’s office 83 percent. You cut interdiction substantially. I mean that’s what, I want to stop it from coming across the border. And in my administration, we’re going to train the National Guard to stop it from coming across the border. This is a invasion of drugs from all over the world. And we have a responsibility. You had a surgeon — or before General McCaffrey (ph) you had a lady who said we ought to consider legalizing drugs. Is that the kind of leadership we need? And I won’t comment on other things that happened in your administration or your past about drugs. But it seems to me the kids ought to — if they’ve started, they ought to stop and just don’t do it.
LEHRER: Mr. President.
CLINTON: Let me say again, we did have a drug czar in Arkansas, but he answered to the governor, just like this one answers to the President. That’s what I thought we ought to do.
Secondly, Senator Dole, you voted against the crime bill that had the death penalty for drug kingpins in it. And you voted to cut services to 23 million school children under the safe and drug-free schools act. I don’t think that means you’re soft on drugs. We just have a different approach. But let me remind you, my family has suffered from drug abuse. I know what it’s like to see somebody you love nearly lose their lives, and I hate drugs, Senator. We need to do this together and we can.
LEHRER: Senator Dole, on the government, continuing to talk about the government’s role. If elected President, would you seek to repeal the Brady Bill and the ban on assault weapons?
DOLE: Not if I didn’t have a better idea. But I’ve got a better idea. It’s something I’ve worked on for 15 years. It’s called the automated check or the instant check. It’s being used in 17 states right now. States like Florida, Colorado, Virginia, and other states. You don’t buy any gun. You don’t get any gun. We’ve got 20 million names on a computer in Washington, D.C. of people who should not have guns. We ought to keep guns out of the hands of criminals. And, there are eight other categories that should not have guns. I’ve been working on this for a long, long time. You walk in, you put your little card in there. If it says tilt, you don’t get any gun. You don’t get a hand gun, you don’t get a rifle, you don’t get a shot gun, you get zippo.
If we’re going to protect American children and American families and people who live as prisoners in their own home, we’ve got to stop guns from being dumped on the street.
The administration says they support the instant check. They’ve appropriated about $200 million, but only spent about $3 million to get it underway. In our administration, in my administration, we will expedite. This keeps up with technology. It keeps guns out of the hands of people who should not have guns. That is the bottom line. And I believe it’s a good idea, has strong bipartisan support. And perhaps that’s another thing we can depoliticize.
You talk about the Brady Bill. There has only been one prosecution under the Brady — only one under the assault weapon ban and only seven under the Brady Bill that you talk about all the time. And on the assault weapon ban, out of 17 weapons that were banned, only six banned now because eleven have been modified and are back on the street. Let’s get together on this instant check because that will really make a difference.
LEHRER: Mr. President.
CLINTON: Let me say, first of all, Senator Dole has gone back and forth about whether he’d be for repealing the Brady Bill or repealing the assault weapons ban. And I think his present position is he would not do so, and if that’s true I’m grateful for it. But let’s look at the facts here. The Brady Bill has kept at least 60,000 felons, fugitives and stalkers from getting hand guns. Senator Dole led the fight against the Brady Bill. He tried to keep it from coming to my desk. He didn’t succeed and I signed it and I’m glad I did.
Then when we had the assault weapons ban in the Senate, Senator Dole fought it bitterly and opposed the entire crime bill and almost brought the entire crime bill down because the National Rifle Association didn’t want the assault weapons ban, just like they didn’t want the Brady Bill. But two years later nobody’s lost their handguns. I mean, their rifles. We’ve expanded the Brady Bill to cover people who beat up their spouses and their kids. And this is a safer country. So I’m glad I took on that fight and I believe, with all respect, I was right and he was wrong.
DOLE: Well, the President doesn’t have it quite right. I mean, it seemed to me at the time the assault weapon ban was not effective. But that’s history. I told the NRA that’s history. You’re not going to worry about it anymore. I’m not going to worry about it anymore. Let’s do something better. Let’s stop, you know, playing the political game, Mr. President. Talking about this and this. You add all the states that’ve used the instant check and how many weapons they keep, kept out of the hands of criminals. It would far surpass the numbers you mentioned. So in my view, if you want to be protected, you ought to vote for Bob Dole and we’ll get the instant check passed and we’ll keep guns out of the hands of criminals.
LEHRER: Mr. President, Senator Dole said the other day that you practiced a photo-op foreign policy that has lessened the credibility of the United States throughout the world. Is he wrong about that?
CLINTON: If he, that’s what he said, he’s not right about that. Look at where we are today. The United States is still the indispensable nation in the aftermath of the Cold War and on the brink of the 21st Century. I have worked to support our country as the world’s strongest force for peace and freedom, prosperity and security.
We have done the following things: Number one, we’ve managed the aftermath of the Cold War, supporting a big drop in nuclear weapons in Russia. The removal of Russian troops from the Baltics. The integration of Central and Eastern European democracies into a new partnership with NATO. And, I might add, with the democratic Russia.
There are no nuclear missiles pointed at the children of the United States tonight and have not been in our administration for the first time since the dawn of the nuclear age.
We have worked hard for peace and freedom. When I took office, Haiti was governed by a dictator that had defied the United States. When I took office, the worst war in Europe was waging in Bosnia. Now there is a the democratically elected president in Haiti. Peace in Bosnia. We just had the election there. We’ve made progress in Northern Ireland, in the Middle East. We’ve also stood up to the new threats of terrorism. The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, organized crime, and we have worked hard to expand America’s economic presence around the world with the biggest increase in trade with the largest new number of trade agreements in history And that’s one of the reasons America is number one in auto production again.
LEHRER: Senator.
DOLE: Well, I have a different view. Again, Iâ€™ve supported the President on Bosnia, and I think we were told the troops would be out in a year. Now I understand it’s been extended ’til some time next year. But, let’s start with Somalia, where they dragged Americans through the streets, and where 18 Americans were killed one day, because they didn’t have, they were pinned down for eight hours, the rangers. They didn’t have the weapons, they didn’t have the tanks. They asked for the tanks. They didn’t get the tanks from this administration because we were nation building. It’s called mission creep. We turn it over to the United Nations. The President didn’t have much to do about it. You look at Haiti, where we spend about three billion dollars and we got an alarm call there about two weeks ago. You got to send down some more people, because the president’s found out there are death squads on his on his, in his own property. So we need more protection from America. Bosnia, Northern Ireland. There’s no ceasefire in Bosnia. I think there are still lot of problems in Bosnia. We agreed to train and arm the Muslims so they could defend themselves, the policy you had when you ran in 1992. We haven’t done that. We’re way behind, which means Americans can’t come home. Americans shouldn’t have gone there in the first place, had we let them defend themselves, as they have a right to do under Article 57 of the United Nations charter.
LEHRER: Mr. President.
CLINTON: First of all, I take full responsibility for what happened in Somalia, but the American people must remember that those soldiers were under an American commander when that happened. I believe they did the best they could under the circumstances, and let’s not forget that hundreds of thousands of lives were saved there.
Secondly, in Haiti, political violence is much, much smaller than it was. Thirdly, in Bosnia it’s a virtual miracle that there has been no return to war and at least there has now been an election. And institutions are beginning to function.
In Northern Ireland, in the Middle East we are better off than we were four years ago. There will always be problems in this whole world. But if we’re moving in the right direction and America is leading, we’re better off.
LEHRER: Senator Dole, if elected president, what criteria would you use to decide when to send U.S. troops into harm’s way.
DOLE: Well it, after World War I, we had, you know, a policy of disengagement. Then from World War I to World War II we had sort of a compulsory engagement policy. Now I think we have a selective engagement policy. We have to determine when our interests are involved, not the United Nations’ interests. And many of the things the President talked about, he turned over to the United Nations. They decided.
He’s deployed more troops than any president in history around the world. It’s cost us billions and billions of dollars for peace-keeping operations. Look these are facts. And it seems to me that when you make a decision, the decision is made by the President of the United States, by the Commander-in-Chief. He makes that decision when he commits young men or young women who are going to go round and defend our liberty and our freedom. That would be my position.
Then I’m going to have a top down review at the Pentagon, not a bottom up review. We all fight over how much money is there. I want a top down review to determine what our priorities are and what we should do in defense, and then follow that policy instead of this bottom up review with all the services fighting for the money. You know, the President said he was going to cut defense $60 billion, he cut defense $112 billion. Devastated states like California and others. And I think now we’ve got a problem. We’ve got to go back and look. It’s just like you said in Texas one day, you know raised taxes too much, and you did, and you cut defense too much, Mr. President, and you did. You may have said that, too.
But the bottom line is, we are the strongest nation in the world. We provide the leadership and we’re going to have to continue to provide the leadership, but let’s do it on our terms when our interests are involved and not when somebody blows the whistle at the United Nations.
CLINTON: Our military is the strongest military in the world. It is the strongest, best prepared, best equipped it has ever been. There is very little difference in the budget that I proposed and the Republican budget over the next six-year period. We are spending a lot of money to modernize our weapons system. I have proposed a lot of new investments to improve the quality of life for our soldiers, for our men and women in uniform, for their families, for their training. That is my solemn obligation.
You ask when do you decide to deploy them. The interests of the American people must be at stake. Our values must be at stake. We have to be able to make a difference. And frankly we have to consider what the risks are to our young men and women in uniform. But I believe the evidence is that our deployments have been successful, in Haiti, in Bosnia, when we moved to Kuwait to repel Saddam Hussein’s threatened invasion of Kuwait. When I have sent the fleet into the Taiwan straits. When we’ve worked hard to end the Northern Korean nuclear threat.
I believe the United States is at peace tonight in part because of the disciplined, careful, effective deployment of our military resources.
LEHRER: Senator Dole.
DOLE: Well I failed to mention North Korea and Cuba, a while ago. You look at North Korea where they have enough plutonium to build six nuclear bombs. We’ve sort of distanced ourselves from our ally, South Korea. They lost about a million people in the war, the Korean War, the forgotten war. We lost 53,000 Americans.
We shouldn’t be doing any favors for North Korea. It’s a closed society. We don’t have any inspection. We don’t know whether it’s going to work or not, but we keep giving the incentives. Someone called them something else. Incentives. We don’t know what’s going to happen. Here we have Cuba 90 miles from our shores, and what have we done, we passed the law that gave people a right to sue and the President postponed it for six months. And it seemed to me if you want to send a signal, you’ve got to send a signal, Mr. President. The sooner the better off we’ll be, if you put tougher sanctions on Castro, not try to make it easier for him.
LEHRER: Mr. President, what is your attitude toward Cuba and how Cuba should be treated?
CLINTON: Well, first of all, for the last four years we have worked had to put more and more pressure on the Castro government to bring about more openness and move toward democracy. In 1992, before I became President, the Congress passed the Cuba Democracy Act and I enforced it vigorously. We made the embargo tougher but we increased contacts people to people with the Cubans, including direct telephone service, which was largely supported by the Cuban-American community. Then Cuba shot down two of our planes and murdered four people in international air space. They were completely beyond the pale of the law, and I signed the Helms-Burton legislation. Senator Dole is correct. I did give about six months before the effective date of the act before lawsuits can actually be filed, even though they’re effective now, and can be legally binding, because I want to change Cuba. And the United States needs help from other countries.
Nobody in the world agrees with our policy on Cuba now. But this law can be used as leverage to get other countries to help us to move Cuba to democracy. Every single country in Latin America, Central America and the Caribbean is a democracy tonight but Cuba. And if we stay firm and strong, we will be able to bring Cuba around as well.
DOLE: That’s the point I made. We have to be firm and strong. And I hope that will happen. It will happen starting next January and maybe it can happen the balance of this year. We have not been firm and strong. You look at the poor people who still live in Cuba. It’s a haven for drug smugglers and we don’t have a firm policy when it comes to Fidel Castro. In my view, the policy has failed.
So Congress passes the law, the President signs it, like he does a lot of things. But he, like welfare reform, I’m going to sign it but I’m going to try to change it next year. A lot of these election-year conversions, the President talks about the drug money, and all the other things, all this antismoking campaign all happened in 1996.
And I think the people viewing out there ought to go back and take a look at the record when he fought a balanced budget amendment. When he gave you that biggest tax increase in history; when he tried to take over your healthcare system. When he fought regulatory reform that cost the average family 6 to $7,000 a year. This is a serious business. It’s about your family; it’s about your business, and in this case it’s about a firmer policy with Cuba.
CLINTON: There were several off-the-subject quaffers in that litany. Let me just mention, Senator Dole voted for $900 billion in tax increases. His running mate Jack Kemp once said that Bob Dole never met a tax he didn’t hike. And everybody knows, including the Wall Street Journal, hardly a friend of the Democratic party of this administration, that the ’82 tax increase he sponsored in inflation-adjusted dollars was the biggest tax increase in American history. So we ought to at least get the facts out here on the table so we can know where to go from here.
LEHRER: Senator Dole, you mentioned health reform several times. What do you think should be done about the healthcare system?
DOLE: Let me first answer that question about the 1982 tax cut. We were closing loopholes, we were going after big corporations. I know you probably would oppose it, Mr. President, but I think we should have a fairer system and a flatter system, and we’ll have a fairer and flatter system and we’re going to make the economic package work. Healthcare. Well, we finally passed the Kassebaum bill. The President was opposed to it in 1993. He wanted to give us this big system, that took over about one-seventh of the economy, that put on price controls, created all these state alliances, and would cost $1.5 trillion and force people into managed care, whether they wanted it or not. Most people want to see their own doctor. They’re going to see their own doctor when Bob Dole is president. We won’t threaten anybody.
So we passed the Kassebaum-Kennedy, the Kennedy Kassebaum bill that will cover about 20 to 25 million people. We’ve been for that for four, five, six years. The President held it up. And even when it finally got near passage, Senator Kennedy held it up for 100 days, because he wasn’t satisfied with one provision. But it will cover preexisting conditions. If you change your job, you’re going to be covered. So there are a lot of good things in this bill we should have done instead of trying this massive, massive takeover by the Federal government. But then of course we had a Democratic Congress and they didn’t want to do that. Until we got a Republican Congress, we finally got action, I’m proud of my colleagues in the Republican Party for getting that done. It means a lot to a lot of people watching us tonight.
CLINTON: Well, that sounds very good, but it’s very wrong. Senator Dole remembers well that we actually offered not to even put in a healthcare bill in 1994, uh ’93, but instead to work with the Senate Republicans and write a joint bill. And they said no because they got a memo from one of their political advisers saying that instead they should characterize whatever we did as big government and make sure nothing was done to aid healthcare before the ’94 elections so they could make that claim. Well, maybe we bit off more than we could chew, but we’re pursuing a step-by-step reform now. The Kennedy-Kassebaum bill that I signed will make it possible for 25 million people to keep their health insurance when they change jobs or when somebody in their family’s been sick. I signed a bill to stop these drive-by deliveries when insurance companies can force people out of the hospital after 24 hours and I vetoed Senator Dole’s Medicare plan that would have forced a lot of seniors into managed care and taken a lot more money out of their pockets and led to Medicare withering on the vine.
DOLE: Well, many of the provisions in the Kassebaum bill were provisions that — my provisions, like deductions for long-term care, making certain that self-employed people that are watching tonight can deduct not 30 percent but 80 percent of you pay for premiums. You can also deduct long-term care now, so it’s a good it’s a good start. I think there’s enough — we’re even looking at our tax cut proposal, our economic package. There may be a way of reaching out to the uninsured, because there are a lot of uninsured people in the country, particularly children, that should be covered. Another way you can do is to expand Medicaid. In America no one will go without healthcare, no one will go without food.
LEHRER: Senator, go ahead and finish your sentence.
DOLE: All right. Food.
LEHRER: Back to foreign affairs for a moment, Mr. President. Are you satisfied with the way you handled this last Iraq crisis and the end result?
CLINTON
: Well, I believe that we did the appropriate thing under the circumstances. Saddam Hussein is under a U.N. resolution not to threaten his neighbors or threaten his own, repress his own citizens. Unfortunately, a lot of people, have never been as concerned about the Kurds as the United States has tried to be, and we’ve been flying an operation to protect them out of Turkey for many years now. What happened was one of the Turkish, one of the Kurdish leaders invited him to go up north, but we felt since the whole world community had told him not to do it, that once he did it we had to do something. We did not feel that I could commit. I certainly didn’t feel I should commit American troops to throw him out of where he had gone, and that was the only way to do that. So the appropriate thing strategically to do was to reduce his ability to threaten his neighbors. We did that by expanding what’s called the no-fly zone by increasing our allies’ control of the air space now from the Kuwait border to the suburbs of Baghdad. Was it the right thing to do? I believe it was. Is it fully effective? Did it make him withdraw from the north? Well, he does , he has a little bit, and I hope he will continue. We have learned that you give him an inch he’ll take a mile. We had to do something, and even though not all of our allies supported it at first, I think most of them now believe that what we did was an appropriate thing to do.
LEHRER: Senator Dole.
DOLE: Well, the president’s own CIA director says Saddam is stronger now than he was. I don’t understand extending the no-fly zone in the south when the trouble was in the north. And what we’ve done during the Bush administration, the Kurds were at the State Department, negotiating, trying to work their differences out. Now we’ve got all thousands and thousands of refugees. We’re even shipping 3,000 Kurds to Guam. It involves Turkey. It’s a real problem. Saddam is probably about as strong as he ever was. We shot, what, 44 cruise missiles, worth about a million-two a piece, and hit some radar, that repaired in a couple, three days. Did we inflict any damage? No. Did we have any allies helping? Well, we have Great Britain. They’re always very loyal to us, and I appreciate that. And of course Kuwait. Even though they had to find out they had 5,000 troops coming, they didn’t even understand that. We had to get their permission. The bottom line is, we went in there alone. We are supposed to be operating under a U.N. resolution. We did it without any of our allies that helped in the Gulf.
CLINTON: Senator Dole has two or three times before tonight criticized me for working with the U.N. Now I’m being criticized for not working with the U.N.
DOLE: It’s not the U.N.
CLINTON: Sometimes the United States has to act alone or at least has to act first. Sometimes we cannot let other countries have a veto on our foreign policy. I could not send soldiers into the north of Iraq, that would have been wrong. It could reduce Saddam Hussein’s abilities to threaten Kuwait and his other neighbors again. That’s what I did. I still believe it was the right thing to do.
LEHRER: Senator Dole, on your photo-op foreign policy charge against the President —
DOLE: Not mine.
LEHRER: Oh, No, no. I mean your charge against the President, that he has a photo-op foreign policy. Does the Middle East summit last week fall into that category?
DOLE: Well, there were some good pictures, but does it fall into that category? I don’t know. I want to be very serious. I’ve supported the President when I thought he was right on Bosnia. I supported him on NAFTA and GATT. So it’s not that we always disagree. Others disagreed with us.
The Mideast is very difficult. But it seemed to me just as an observer that you know before you’d call somebody to America, you’d have some notion what the end result might be. Now maybe it’s better just to get together and sit down and talk. Maybe that was the purpose. And I know talks have started again today. But again it’s almost like an ad hoc foreign policy. It’s ad hoc, it’s sort of we get up in the morning and read the papers, what country’s in trouble, we’ll have a meeting.
Now, to me that’s not the strategy that I think people expect from America. I think we have lost credibility, and I say this very honestly without any partisanship. We’ve lost credibility around the world. Our allies know, — they’re not certain what we’re going to do, what our reaction, what our response is going to be. Nobody suggested sending troops to Iraq, if that was the hint there from the President. But I do think that Saddam Hussein is stronger than he was. And I do believe that we didn’t gain a great deal in the Mideast by bringing three of the four leaders, one refused to come, to Washington D.C.
CLINTON: We have a very consistent policy in the Middle East: It is to support the peace process; to support the security of Israel; and to support those who are prepared to take risks for peace. It is a very difficult environment. The feelings are very strong. There are extremists in all parts of the Middle East who want to kill that peace process. Prime Minister Rabin gave his life because someone in his own country literally hated him for trying to bring peace. I would like to have had a big, organized summit, but those people were killing each other, rapidly, innocent Arab children, innocent Israeli people, they were dying. And there is ,so much trust has broken down in the aftermath of the change of government. I felt that if I could just get the parties together to say let’s stop the violence, start talking, commit to the negotiations, that would be a plus.
Now today the Secretary of State is in the Middle East and they’ve started negotiations and all those leaders promised me they would not quit until they resolved the issues between them and got the peace process going forward again.
LEHRER: Senator Dole.
DOLE: Well, I was disappointed. The President has not called for an unconditional end to the violence. It seemed to me the violence stopped when these leaders came to America. The killing and tragedies had taken place. And it is unfortunate, it is a difficult area, no doubt about it. It shouldn’t be politicized in any way by the President or by his opponent. And I don’t intend to politicize it. I hope they talked and I hope they’ve reached some result and that the killing will end.
CLINTON: Thank you.
LEHRER: Mr. President, in your acceptance speech in Chicago, you said the real choice in this race is, quote, whether we build a bridge to the future or a bridge to the past; about whether we believe our best days are still out there or our best days are behind us; about whether we want a country of people all working together or one where you’re on your own, end quote. Are you saying that you believe Senator Dole is a man of the past and if elected president he would lead the country backward?
CLINTON: Well, I’m saying that Senator Dole said in his fine speech in San Diego that he wanted to build a bridge to the past. And I think I know what he meant by that. He’s troubled, as I am, by some of the things that go on today. But I believe America is the greatest country in human history because we have maintained freedom and increasing prosperity by relentlessly pushing the barriers of knowledge, the barriers of the present, always moving into the future. That’s why when I became President I was determined to kind of move beyond this whole stale debate that had gone on in Washington for too long to get this country moving again. And that’s why we’ve got a country with ten and a half million more jobs, and record numbers of new businesses, and rising incomes, and falling crime rates, and welfare roll rates. That’s why we’re moving in the right direction. And I’m trying to emphasize that what I want to do is to continue to do that. That’s why my balanced budget plan will still invest and grow this economy. That’s why I want a tax cut for education and child rearing, but it’s got to be paid for. That’s why I want to continue the work we have done over partisan opposition, to work with communities to bring that crime rate down until our streets are all safe again. These are my commitments. I am very oriented toward the future. I think this election has to be geared toward the future. I think America’s best days are still ahead, but we’ve got to build the right bridge.
LEHRER: Senator Dole.
DOLE: You know, the President reminds me sometimes of my brother Kenny, who is no longer alive. But Kenny was a great talker. And he used to tell me things that I knew were not quite accurate. So we always had a rule, we divided by six. Maybe in your case maybe just two. But 11 million new jobs and everything, I mean the President can’t take credit for everything that governors are doing, whether that’s happening in New York City when it comes to the murder rate and then not be responsible for the bad things that happen, whether it’s drug use or something else in America. So it seems to me that we can talk about what we call Kenny, the great exaggerator. He just liked to make it sound exager, a little better, made him feel better.
When it comes to bridges, I want a bridge to the future. I also want a bridge to the truth. We have to tell the truth. We’ve got people watching tonight and listening tonight trying to find the truth. And the truth is, there is a lot wrong with America. We need a strong economic package; we need a tax cut; we need the $500 child credit, and we’ll have that soon.
LEHRER: Mr. President.
CLINTON: I do not for a moment think I’m entitled to all the credit for all the good things that have happened in America. But where I have moved to work with the American people to help them have the tools to make the most of their own lives, I think I should get some credit for that.
I also personally took responsibility tonight when Senator Dole asked me about the drug problem. But, you know, I think my ideas are better for the future.
Senator Dole voted against student loans, against Headstart, against creating the Department of Education. If he gets elected president, we’ll start the new century without anyone in the cabinet of the President representing education in our children. I personally don’t think that’s the right kind of future for America, and I think we ought to take a different tack.
LEHRER: Senator Dole, do you still favor eliminating the Department of Education.
DOLE: Yes. I didn’t favor it when it was in, started. I voted against it. It was a tribute after President Carter’s election to the National Education Association who send a lot of delegates to the Democratic convention, who gives 99.5 percent of their money, Democrat Democrats, and the President, and a lot of the teachers send their kids to private schools or better public schools. So what we want to do is called opportunity scholarships. Now, some say, oh, you’re a Republican, you can’t be reaching out to these people. I’ve reached out to people all my life. I’ve worked on the food stamp program, proudly. And the WIC program, and the school lunch program with senators like George McGovern, Hubert Humphrey and others, to name a few of my Democratic friends.
I’m not some extremist out here. I care about people. I have my own little foundation that’s raised about $10 million for the disabled. I don’t advertise it. Just did, haven’t before. And I try to do a lot of things that I think might be helpful to people.
So it seems to me that we ought to take that money we can save from the Department of Education, put it into opportunity scholarships and tell little Landale Shakespeare out in Cleveland, Ohio, and tell your mother and father, you’re going to get to go to school because we’re going to match what the state puts up, and you’re going to go to the school of your choice. I don’t fault the President or the vice president for sending their children to private schools or better schools. I applaud them for it, I don’t criticize them. But why shouldn’t everybody have that choice. Why shouldn’t low income Americans and low middle income Americans. I’m excited about it. It’s going to be a big, big opportunity for a lot of people.
CLINTON: Let me say first of all, I’m all for students having more choices. We’ve worked hard to expand public school choice in my balanced budget bill. There’s funds for 3,000 new schools created by teachers and parents, sometimes by business people, called charter schools that have no rules, they’re free of bureaucracy and can only stay in existence if they perform and teach children. The ones that are out there are doing well.
What I’m against is Senator Dole’s plan to take money away from all the children we now help with limited Federal funds and help far fewer. If we’re going to have a private voucher plan, that ought to be done at the local level or the state level. But Senator Dole has consistently opposed Federal help to education. He voted against student loans; he voted against my improved student loan plan; he voted against the National Service bill, against the HeadStart bill; he voted against our efforts in safe and drug-free schools. He voted against these programs, he does not believe it. That’s the issue. 90 percent of our kids are out there in those public schools and we need to lift their standards and move them forward with the programs like those I’ve outlined in this campaign.
DOLE: I’d better correct the President. I don’t know what time it is, but it’s probably getting late. I want to correct, the all these things I voted against, they were probably part of some big package that had a lot of pork in it or a lot of things that we shouldn’t have had and we probably voted no. I’ve supported all the education programs. I’ve supported Headstart, I think we ought to look at it. So I don’t want anybody out there to think we’ve just been voting no, no, no. Let’s give low income parents the same right that people of power and prestige have in America and let them go to better schools. Let’s not, let’s help, let’s turn the schools back to the teachers and back to the parents and take it away from the National Education Association.
LEHRER: Mr. President, what is wrong with the school choice proposal?
CLINTON: I support school choice. I support school choice. I have advocated expansions of public school choice alternatives and I said the creation of 3,000 new schools that we are going to help the states to finance. But if you’re going to have a private voucher plan, that ought to be determined by states in localities where they’re raising and spending most of the money.
I simply think it’s wrong to take money away from programs that are helping build basic skills for kids, 90 percent of them are in the public schools; to take money away from programs that are helping fund the school lunch program, that are helping to fund the other programs, that are helping our schools to improve their standards. Our schools are getting better, and our schools can be made to be even better still with the right kind of community leadership and partnership at the school level.
I have been a strong force for reform. And, Senator, I remind you that a few years ago when I supported teacher testing while in my home state I was pretty well lambasted by the teachers association. I just don’t believe we ought to be out there running down teachers and attacking them the way you did at the Republican convention. I think we ought to be lifting them up and moving our children forward.
And let me just say that budget that you passed that I vetoed would have cut 50,000 kids out of Headstart. It would have eliminated the AmeriCorps plan and it would have cut back on student loans and scholarships. Now, it would have. That’s a fact. That’s one of the big reasons I vetoed it. We need to be doing more in education, not less.
DOLE: Well, the AmeriCorps program, I must say, if that’s one of your successes, I wouldn’t speak about it too loudly. It costs about $27,000 to pay people to volunteer. We’ve got four million young people volunteering every year, the number hasn’t gone down. And you pick out 20,000, whether they need the money or not, and they get paid for volunteering. I like young people. I like teachers. I’m a product of a public school. You attended a private school for some time in your life. I like teachers. You’re not for school choice, you can’t be for school choice, because this is that special interest money again. When you get 99.5 percent of the money, we don’t know what happened to the other .5 percent, we’re looking for it, somebody got it, but it all went to Democrats. And this is part of that liberal establishment, one of those liberal things that you just can’t do. You’re for school uniforms and curfews and you’re opposed to truancy. Now that’s not reform, Mr. President. Why can’t Landale Shakespeare in Cleveland or Pilar Gonzales in Milwaukee give their children an opportunity to go to a better school. Some schools aren’t safe. Some schools aren’t even safe. Your choice is nothing. Let’s give them a real choice, the kind of choice you had, and the kind of choice a lot of people have in America. If we want to stop crime and teenage pregnancy, let’s start with education.
CLINTON: First of all, Senator Dole, let’s set the record straight. I was able for two years when I was in, a very young boy to go to a Catholic school, but I basically went to public schools all my life. And I’ve worked hard for a long time to make them better, 90 percent of our kids are there. You, it’s amazing to me, you are all for having more responsibility at the local level for everything except schools. Where we don’t have very much money at the Federal level to spend on education, we ought to spend it helping the 90 percent of the kids that we can help. If a local school district in Cleveland or anyplace else wants to have a private choice plan like Milwaukee did, let them have at it. I might say the results are highly ambiguous. But I want to get out there and give a better education opportunity to all of our children and that’s why I vetoed the budget you passed with $30 billion in education cuts. It was wrong, and my plan for the future is better.
LEHRER: Senator Dole, at the Republican convention you said the following and I quote, it is demeaning to the nation that within the Clinton Administration a core of the elite who never grew up, never did anything real, never sacrificed, never suffered, and never learned should have the power to fund with your earnings their dubious and self-serving schemes, end quote. Whom precisely and what precisely did you have in mind?
DOLE: I had precisely in mind a lot of the people that were in the White House and other agencies who’ve never been had any experience, who came to Washington without any experience, they all were very liberal, of course, or they wouldn’t be in the administration. And their idea was that they knew what was best for the American people.
Now, I feel very strongly about a lot of things. I feel strongly about education. I want to help young people have an education, just as I had an education after World War II with the GI bill of Rights. We’ve had millions of young men and women in subsequent subsequent wars change the face of the nation because the government helped with their education.
Now the reason they don’t have, The reason the President can’t support this is pretty obvious. It’s not taking anything away from schools, it’s new money. It’s not being taken away from anybody else, except we’ll downsize the Department of Education. But this is a very liberal administration. This is an administration that gave you the big tax cut. This administration tried to take over healthcare and impose a governmental system. This is the administration that fought regulatory reform that is putting a lot of small businessmen and small businesswomen out of business. This is the administration that fought the balanced budget amendment and vetoed a balanced budget and vetoed welfare reform twice, and the list goes on and on and on, that’s what I had in mind.
I want people in my administration and will have people in my administration who understand America. There won’t be 10 millionaires and 14 lawyers in the cabinet. There will be people with experience and people who understand America and people who’ve made it and know the hard knocks in life.
CLINTON: When Senator Dole made that remark about all the elitists, all the young elitists in the administration, one of the young men who works for me who grew up in a house trailer looked at me and said, Mr. President, I know how you grew up, who is he talking about. And you know this liberal charge, that’s what their party always drags out when they get in a tight race. It’s sort of their golden oldie, you know. It’s a record they think they can play that everybody loves to hear. And I just don’t think that dog will hunt this time.
The American people should make up their own mind. Here’s the record: We cut deficit four years in a row for the first time before the Civil War — I mean, before World War II, and maybe before the Civil War, too. We’ve got ten and a half million new jobs; we’ve got record numbers of those new small businesses. We’ve made every one of them eligible for a tax cut. We’ve got declining crime rates, two million fewer people on welfare rolls before welfare reform passed, and a 50 percent increase in child support and a crime bill with 60 death penalties and 100,000 police and the assault weapons ban. The American people can make up their mind about whether that’s a liberal record or a record that’s good for America. Liberal, conservative, you put whatever label you want on it.
DOLE: Well, I think it’s pretty liberal, I’ll put that label on it. You take a look at all the programs you’ve advocated, Mr. President. Thank goodness we had a Republican Congress there. The first thing you did when you came into office was set up the stimulus package, said we’ve got a little pork we want to scatter around America, $16 billion. And even some in your own party couldn’t buy that.
I remember talking by the telephone. I’m not even certain you were too excited about that. I won’t, I never repeat what I’ve talked to the President about. In any event, we saved the taxpayers $16 billion. And then came some other program, and then came healthcare, and then came the tax increase and a lot of these things stopped in 1994 because then the Congress changed, and I think we’ve done a good job.
LEHRER: Mr. President, if you’re not a liberal, describe your political philosophy.
CLINTON: I believe that the purpose of politics is to give people the tools to make the most of their own lives; to reinforce the values of opportunity and responsibility, and to build a sense of community so we’re all working together. I don’t believe in discrimination. I believe you can protect the environment and grow the economy. I believe that we have to do these things with a government that’s smaller and less bureaucratic, but that we have to do them nonetheless.
It’s inconvenient for Senator Dole, but the truth is I’ve reduced the size of government more than my Republican predecessors. And I did stop them, I admit that. I sure stopped their budget. Their budget cut enforcement for the Environmental Protection Agency by a third. It cut funds to clean up toxic waste dumps with 10 million of our kids still living within four miles of a toxic waste dump, by a third. It ended the principle that the polluters should pay for those toxic waste dumps unless it was very recent. Their budget weakened our support for education. $30 billion, even cut funds for scholarships and college loans. Their budget cut $270 billion in Medicare and, finally, their budget withdrew the national guarantee of healthcare to poor children, families with children with handicaps, the elderly in nursing homes, poor pregnant women. It was wrong for the country and calling it conservative won’t make it right. It was a bad decision for America and would have been bad for our future if I hadn’t stopped it.
DOLE: Well, the President can define himself in any way he wants, but I think we have to look at the record. Go back to the time he was, what, Texas director for George McGovern. George McGovern is a friend of mine, so I don’t mean, but he was a liberal, proud liberal. I’ve just finished reading a book, I think it’s called — what is it called, what is it, The Demise of the Democratic Party by Ronald Cardash (ph) or something talking about all the liberal influences in the administration. Whether it’s organized labor or whether it’s the Hollywood elite or whether some of the media elite or whether it’s the labor unions or whatever. And so I think you take a look at it. The bottom line is this: I think the American people, thought he’d recite all these bills and all these things, they want to know what’s going to happen to them. They’ve all got a lot of anxieties out there. Did anybody complain when you raised taxes? Did anybody go out and ask the people, how are you going to pay the extra money? That’s why we want an economic package. We want the government to pinch their pennies for a change instead of the people pinching their pennies. That’s what our message is to the people watching. Not all this back and forth, you voted this way, you voted that way, we want a better America as we go into the next century.
CLINTON: The way you get a better America is to balance the budget and protect Medicare, Medicaid, education and the environment; to give a targeted tax cut — and let me talk about the education tax cut — to let people have a $10,000 deduction for the cost of college tuition in any year, any kind of college tuition; to give families a tax credit, a dollar for dollar reduction in their taxes for the cost of a typical community college so we can open that to everybody. And then to let people save in an IRA and withdraw from it without a tax penalty for education, home buying or medical expenses, that’s the right way to go into the 21st Century, balance the budget and cut taxes, not balloon with this $550 billion tax scheme.
LEHRER: Senator Dole, we’ve talked mostly now about differences between the two of you that relate to policy issues and that sort of thing. Are there also significant differences in the more personal area that are relevant to this election?
DOLE: Let me say first, on the President’s promise for another tax cut. I mean, I’ve told people as I’ve traveled around, all of you that got the tax cut he promised last time, vote for him in ’96 and not many hands go up. So the question is, would you buy a used election promise from my opponent. The people want economic reform. They’re having a hard time making ends meet. You’ve got one parent working for the government, the other parent working for the family. This is important business. This is about getting the economy moving again. This is about American jobs and opportunities. It’s about the government, as I said before, pinching its pennies for a change instead of the poor taxpayer. When they raise your taxes nobody runs around asking people where are you going to get the extra money. I think the government can do better. Are there personal differences?
LEHRER: That are relevant to this.
DOLE: Well, my blood pressure is lower, my weight, my cholesterol, but I will not make health an issue in this campaign. So I think he’s a bit taller than I am. But I think there are personal differences. I mean, I’m not I don’t like to get into personal matters. As far as I’m concerned, this is a campaign about issues. It’s about my vision for America and about his liberal vision for America. And not about personal things. You know, I think his liberal vision is a thing of the past. I know he wants to disown it. I wouldn’t want to be a liberal either, Mr. President, but you’re stuck with it because that’s your record, that’s your record in Arkansas: The biggest tax increase in history. The biggest crime increase in history, the biggest drug increase in history in Arkansas.
LEHRER: Mr. President.
CLINTON: Well, just for the record, when I was governor we had the lowest — second lowest tax burden of any state in the country, the highest job growth rate of any state when I ran for president and were widely recognized for a lot of other advances.
But the important thing is, what are we going to do now. I think a targeted tax cut is better for our future, targeted to education and child rearing, with the rest of the education plan, hooking up all of our classrooms to the Internet by the year 2000. Making sure we’ve got an army of reading volunteers, trained people to teach with parents and teachers so that our eight year olds can learn to read. Investing in our environment. Cleaning up two-thirds of the worst toxic waste dumps. Those plans are better than this $550 billion tax scheme.
Now, remember, folks, even Senator Dole’s campaign co-chair here, Senator D’Amato, says he’s got to cut Medicare to pay for this. Everybody who’s looked at it, 500 economists, seven Nobel prize winners, say it’s bad for the economy. It’s going to blow a hole in the deficit It’s going to raise taxes on nine million people and require bigger cuts than the one I vetoed. Our plan is better, it will take us into the future with a growing economy and healthier families.
DOLE: Well, I’m really encouraged to know of your renewed friendship with Al D’Amato, and I know he appreciates it. You didn’t even have tax cuts in your budget, Mr. President, the first two years you were president. It wasn’t until we had a Republican Congress you even thought about, you talked about tax cuts. Getting back to personal differences, I think, Jim, if you are a little more specific, but I think the President could clarify one thing tonight and that’s the question of pardons. I know you talked about it on the Jim, with Jim Lehrer on the PBS show. And I’ve never discussed Whitewater, as I’ve told you personally. I’m not discussing Whitewater now. But I am discussing the power the President has to grant pardons. And hopefully in the next segment you could lay that to rest.
LEHRER: Mr. President.
CLINTON: Well, first of all, you know, he made that remark about Senator D’Amato. He’s arranged for me to spend a lot more time with Senator D’Amato in the last couple years so I’m more familiar with his comments than I used to be. Let me say what I’ve said already about this pardon issue. This is an issue they’ve brought up. It’s under, there’s been no consideration of it, no discussion of it. I will tell you this: I will not give anyone special treatment and I will strictly adhere to the law. And that is what every president has done, as far as I know, in the past but what every other president’s has done. This is something I take seriously and that’s my position.
DOLE: But it seems to me the president shouldn’t have any comment at all. Particularly where it’s someone where you’ve had business dealings. I mean, you may be sending a signal. I don’t know, I’m not questioning anybody.
But as a President of the United States, when somebody asks you about pardons, you say no comment, period. And I think he made a mistake. And I think when you make a mistake, you say I made a mistake. But apparently his position hasn’t changed. If there are other specific areas, but beyond that I haven’t gotten into any of these things, as the President knows. We’ve had that discussion. And again I know Senator D’Amato I think may have had a hearing or two on Whitewater, I can’t remember, but he’s not my general chairman, he’s a friend of mine. And so is Senator Kennedy a friend of yours.
CLINTON: You bet.
DOLE: I remember one day on the floor I said now, gentlemen, let me tax your memories, and Kennedy jumped up and said, why haven’t we thought of that before. You know, so one of your liberal friends.
CLINTON: Thank you.
LEHRER: Mr. President, 30 seconds.
CLINTON: No comment.
DOLE: What’s the subject matter?
LEHRER: Senator Dole, if you could single out one thing that you would like for the voters to have in their mind about President Clinton on a policy matter or a personal matter, what would it be? Something to know about him, understand it and appreciate it.
DOLE: See, if I say anything it’s going to be misconstrued. I don’t think there is even a race between the two, it’s about our vision for America.
I happen to like President Clinton personally. I’m addressing him all evening as Mr. President. I said in 1992 he didn’t extend that courtesy to President Bush. But I respect the presidency. I’ve served under a number of presidents. They all have their strengths and they all have their weaknesses. So I’d rather talk about my strengths. And I think I have my strengths and I think the best thing going for Bob Dole is that Bob Dole keeps his word. It’s a question between trust and fear, and I would say, I think, Mr. President, about all you’ve got going in this campaign is fear.
You’re spending millions and millions of dollars in negative ads frightening senior citizens. I know this to be a fact because I had one tell me last week, Senator don’t cut my Medicare. I’m trying to save your Medicare, just as I rescued Social Security with a bipartisan commission. I have relatives on Medicare. I used to sign welfare checks for my grandparents. I know all about poverty and all about need and all about taking care of people, and that’s been my career in the United States Senate.
And I’ll keep my word on the economic package. If I couldn’t cut taxes and balance the budget the same time, I wouldn’t look at you in the eye in your living room or wherever you might be and say that this is good for America. People will tell you who served with Bob Dole, agree or disagree, he kept his word. That’s what this race is all about.
CLINTON: I’d like the American people to know that I have worked very hard to be on their side. And to move this country forward and we’re better off than we were four years ago. But the most important thing is my plan for the 21st Century is a better plan. A targeted tax cut, a real commitment to educational reform. A deep commitment to making welfare reform work with incentives to the private sector to move people from welfare to work. Now we have to create those jobs, now that we’re requiring people to go do work.
A commitment to continuing step-by-step healthcare reform with the next step helping people who are between jobs to access healthcare and not lose it just because they are out of work for a while. A commitment to grow the economy while protecting the environment. That’s what I’d like them to know about me; that I’ve gotten up every day and worked for the American people and worked so that their children could have their dreams come true.
And I believe we’ve got the results to show we’re on the right track. The most important thing is, I believe we’ve got the right ideas for the future. And I like, I like Senator Dole, you can probably tell we like each other. We just see the world in different ways. And you folks out there are going to have to choose who you think is right.
DOLE: Well, I’d say the first homeless bill in the Senate was the Dole-Byrd Byrd-Dole bill, I can’t remember who was in control then. I remember working with Senator Ribicoff from Connecticut on the Hospice program. We now have 2500 hospices. As I said, I’ve worked all my life when I was in the Congress. I left on June 11th because I wanted the American people to know that I was willing to give up something.
President Clinton ran for governor in 1990 and said he’s going to fill out his term, but he didn’t. He’s president so I guess it’s a little better deal. But I wanted the American people to know I was willing to give up something. I wasn’t just getting more power and more power. So I rolled the dice, I put my career on the line because I really believe the future of America is on the line.
We can give you all these numbers, they don’t mean a thing. If you are out of work, you have nothing to eat or you can’t have medical care, or you’re holding a crack baby in your arms right now, what do you do next? You know, America’s best days are ahead of us. I’ve seen the tough times, I know they can be better and I’ll lead America to a brighter future.
LEHRER: Mr. President, what do you say to Senator Dole’s point that this election is about keeping one’s word?
CLINTON: Let’s look at that. When I ran for president, I said we’d cut the deficit in half in four years; we cut it by 60 percent. I said that our economic plan would produce eight million jobs, we have ten and a half million new jobs. We’re number one in autos again, record numbers of new small businesses. I said we’d put, pass a crime bill that would put 100,000 police on the street, ban assault weapons, and deal with the problems that ought to be dealt with with capital punishment, including capital punishment for drug kingpins, and we did that.
I said we would change the way welfare works, and even before the bill passed we’d moved nearly two million people from welfare to work, working with states and communities. I said we’d get tougher with child support and child support enforcement’s up 50 percent. I said that I would work for tax relief for middle class Americans. The deficit was bigger than I thought it was going to be. I think they’re better off, all of us are, that we got the interest rates down and the deficit down.
Republicans talk about it, but we’re the first the first administration in anybody’s lifetime looking at this program to bring that deficit down four years in a row. We still gave tax cuts to 15 million working Americans, and now I’ve got a plan that’s been out there for two years, it could have been passed already, but instead the Republicans shut the government down to try to force their budget and their plan on me, and I couldn’t take that. But we’ll get the rest of that tax relief. And so I think when you look at those results, you know the plan I’ve laid out for the future has a very good chance of being enacted if you’ll give me a chance to build that bridge to the 21st Century.
LEHRER: Senator.
DOLE: Well, there he goes again, that line has been used before, I mean, exaggerating all the things that he did. He didn’t do all these things. Let’s take all these four years in a row. He came in with a high growth rate, the 1990 budget agreement, which some, you know, didn’t like, had some very tough cost controls, put a lot of pressure on Congress. The S & L crisis was over, they’re starting to sell assets, all that money was coming in. And he cut defense an extra $60 billion, threw a lot of people out of work.
He talks about a smaller government. There are actually more people in government except for people in defense related jobs. They’re gone. The government’s bigger than it was when President Kennedy was around, even though he says it’s not. In addition, Republican Congress cut $53 billion. So let’s just, let’s give credit where credit is due. Governor Engler of Michigan cut taxes 21 times, created a lot of new jobs. So did Governor Thompson, so did Governor Rowland. A lot of people ought to deserve credit, Mr. President. When I’m President of the United States we’re going to have a governors’ council and we’re going to work directly with the governors to get power back to the people and back to the states.
CLINTON: I think a lot of people deserve credit and I’ve tried to give it to them. But I believe that my plan is better than Senator Dole’s ill-advised $550 billion scheme which I’ll say again will blow a hole in the deficit. Our plan will balance the budget, grow the economy, preserve the environment, and invest in education. We have the right approach for the future and looks at the results. It is not midnight in America, Senator. We are better off than we were four years ago.
LEHRER: All right. That’s the last question, the last answer. Let’s go now to the closing statements. Mr. President, you’re first. Two minutes.
CLINTON: Well, first, Jim, let me thank you and thank you, Senator Dole, and thank you, ladies and gentlemen, all of you listening tonight for the chance you’ve given us to appear.
I want to say in the beginning that I am profoundly grateful for the chance that you have given me to serve as president for the last four years. I never could have dreamed anything like this would come my way in life, and I’ve done my best to be faithful to the charge you’ve given me.
I’m proud of the fact that America is stronger and more prosperous and more secure than we were four years ago. And I’m glad we’re going in the right direction. And I’ve done my best tonight to lay out my plans for going forward to an even better future in the next century. I’d like to leave you with the thought that the things I do as president are basically driven by the people whose lives I have seen affected by what does or doesn’t happen in this country. The auto worker in Toledo who was unemployed when I was elected and now has a great job because we’re number one in auto production again. All the people I’ve met who used to be on welfare who are now working and raising their children. And I think what others could do for our country and themselves if we did the welfare reform thing in the proper way. I think of the man who grabbed me by the shoulder once with tears in his eyes and said his daughter was dying of cancer and he thanked me for giving him a chance to spend some time with her without losing his job because of the Family and Medical Leave Act. I think of all the people I grew up with and went to school with and who I stay in touch with and who nerve let me forget how what we do in Washington affects all of you out there in America. Folks, we can build that bridge to the 21st Century, big enough and strong enough for all of us to walk across, and I hope you will help me build it.
LEHRER: Senator Dole, your closing statement, sir.
DOLE: Thank you, Jim; thank you, Mr. President; thank everyone for watching and listening.
I want to address my remarks to the young people of America, because they’re the ones that are going to spend most of their life in the 21st Century. They’re the ones who have the challenges and they are people out there making predictions that it’s not going to be the same. You’re not going to have the opportunities; there are going to be more deficits, more drugs, more crime, and less confidence in the American people. And that’s what you’re faced with, the parents are faced with, and the grand parents are faced with. It’s important, it’s their future. And I would say to those I know there are more young people experimenting with drugs today than ever before; drug use has gone up. And if you care about the future of America, if you care about your future, just don’t do it. And I know that I’m someone older than you. But I’ve had my anxious moments in my life. I’ve learned to feed myself and to walk and to dress. I’m standing here as proof that in America the possibilities are unlimited. I know who I am, and I know where I’m from, and I know where I want to take America. We are the greatest country on the face of the earth. We do more good things for more people in our communities, our neighborhoods, than anywhere that I know of. This is important business. This election is important. I ask for your support, I ask for your help. And if you really want to get involved, just tap into my home page, www.DoleKemp96.org. Thank you. God bless America.
October 9, 1996
The Gore-Kemp Vice Presidential Debate
LEHRER: Good evening from the Mahaffey Theater at the Bayfront Center in St. Petersburg, Florida. I’m Jim Lehrer of the “News Hour” on PBS. Welcome to the 1996 Vice Presidential Debate between Vice President Al Gore, the democratic nominee, and Jack Kemp, the republican nominee. This event is sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates. The rules and format, as drawn and agreed to by the two campaigns are almost identical to those of the presidential debate last Sunday night in Hartford. It is 90 minutes long. The candidates are not permitted to question each other directly. I will ask the questions with no limitations on the subjects. There will be a 90-second answer, a 60-second rebuttal, and a 30-second response to each question. And with the help of some lights, I will help the candidates abide by those time limits. The order for everything was determined by a coin toss. There will be three-minute closing statements, but no opening statements. So, we go now to the first question and to Mr. Kemp. Some supporters of Senator Dole have expressed disappointment over his unwillingness in Hartford Sunday night to draw personal and ethical differences between him and President Clinton. How do you feel about it?
KEMP: Wow, in 90 seconds? I can’t clear my throat in 90 seconds. Jim, Bob Dole and myself do not see Al Gore and Bill Clinton as our enemy. We see them as our opponents. This is the greatest democracy in the world. People are watching not only throughout this country, but all over the world as to how this democracy can function with civility and respect, and decency and integrity. Bob Dole, um, is one of those men who served in the United States Senate, his public life is a public record. He fought on the battlefield. He has worked with Democrats and Republicans. In my opinion, it is beneath Bob Dole to go after anyone personally. Clearly, Abraham Lincoln put it best when he said you serve your party best by serving the nation first. And I can’t think of a better way of serving this nation in 1996 than by electing Bob Dole as the President of the United States of America. These issues are fully capable of being understood and reflected upon by the American people. This is a democracy in which we have the freest press and the greatest First Amendment rights in the history of mankind. And Bob and I respect that. These issues will be aired, but they’ll be aired with dignity and respect, and, ultimately, leave it to the American people to make up their minds about who should be the leader of this country into the 21st Century.
LEHRER: Mr. Vice President?
GORE: Thank you, Mr. Lehrer. And I would like to thank the people of St. Petersburg for being such wonderful hosts. My family and I are very glad to be here and I would like to thank Jack Kemp for the answer that he just gave. I think we have an opportunity tonight to have a positive debate about this country’s future. I’d like to start by offering you a deal, Jack. If you won’t use any football stories, I won’t tell any of my warm and humorous stories about chlorofluorocarbon abatement.
KEMP: It’s a deal. I can’t even pronounce it.
GORE: What I do want to talk about tonight is Bill Clinton’s positive plan for America’s future. We have a plan to balance the budget while protecting Medicare, Medicaid, education and the environment. Creating millions of new jobs, including one million new jobs in America’s inner cities. I’m excited about the chance to talk about this plan and even more excited about the chance to work on it, if you, the people of this country, will give Bill Clinton and me the privilege of doing so for four more years.
LEHRER: Mr. Kemp?
KEMP: I really got only two differences with Bill Clinton — Â President Clinton and Mr. Gore, foreign policy and domestic policy. Our foreign policy is ambivalent, confusing, it is sending strong signals to the wrong people, and we have learned over the years that weakness is provocative, but domestic economy is not doing what it can do. This President believes we are at our capacity. Bob Dole and I believe we can do a lot better. It is about the potential of the American people to lift themselves up and not have their lives controlled by the United States Government and Washington.
LEHRER: Mr. Vice President, what do you see as the political philosophy differences in a general way between you and President Clinton on the one hand, Mr. Kemp and Senator Dole on the other?
GORE: The differences are very clear. We have a positive plan based on three principles. We want to provide opportunity for all Americans. We insist on responsibility being accepted in turn by everyone, and we want to strengthen our communities and their ability to support families and individuals in our common effort to create a bright future. Here’s how we plan to do that: We have a balanced budget plan that has targeted tax cuts for middle-income families. We’ve already given tax cuts to 15 million of the hardest pressed working families in America. Our plan for the next four years features a $1,500 tax credit, called a Hope Scholarship, for tuition at community college, junior college or college. A $10,000 tax deduction for college tuition for those who go further, so that, in essence, no American family will ever be taxed on the money they spend for college tuition. Also, tax relief for first-time home buyers, tax encouragement for savings and help in paying health care expenses, and a tax break, actually, the elimination of capital gains taxes on the — on the profits from the sale of a home. All of this is within a balanced budget plan, which protects Medicare, Medicaid, education and the environment.
KEMP: Jim, this economy is overtaxed, overregulated, too many people suing each other, there’s too much litigation. Our education is not up to the standards that the American family and the American people want for their children. And, clearly, the welfare system is a disgrace to our Judeo-Christian principles. It is not the values of the poor that should be called into question, it is the values of the welfare system from Washington and uh that prevent people from climbing out of poverty. Our biggest debate with this administration on domestic policy is that they think we’re at our fullest capacity, that weâ€™ve reached our potential and 2.5 percent growth is enough for America. Frankly, that is not good enough for this country. We can not just run the clock out on the 20th Century. It, clearly, we need to lower the tax rate across the board on working and saving and investing. I know my friend, Al, will suggest that is trickle-down economics. Well, Al, if it’s trickle-down economics, ask Van Woods, a young entrepreneur who owns a restaurant in Harlem, if it’s trickle down. He said he would hire 60 more people if we cut the Capital Gains Tax.
GORE: I talked about our positive agenda for the future a moment ago. Your original answer was about the contrast. The plan from Senator Dole and Mr. Kemp is a risky, $550-billion tax scheme that actually raises taxes on 9 million of the hardest pressed working families. It would blow a hole in the deficit, cause much deeper cuts in Medicare, Medicaid, education and the environment and knock our economy off track, raising interest rates, mortgage rates and car payments. We stopped that plan before. We will stop it again. We want a positive plan for growth and more jobs.
LEHRER: Mr. Kemp, back to the philosophy question. Do you think there’s a basic philosophy difference between these two tickets, or is it about specifics, which both of you have talked about?
KEMP: Well, this is a perfect example. Bob Dole and I want to cut the tax rates across the board on each and every American, working, saving, investing and taking risks in America. All wealth is created, and all growth is generated by risk-taking entrepreneurs. The tax rate on capital in America is way too high. It’s too high on the family and it’s particularly too high on working men and women. The average family in America, at median level of income, probably is spending 25 to 26 percent of their income sent to the federal government. That’s more than shelter, food, clothing, and energy. That’s just not right. When I was growing up in Los Angeles, my parents were a one working family, one breadwinner per family was all that was necessary. Now if a woman wants to go to work or a man wants to go to work, it ought to be their choice, not the choice of the Washington, D.C. establishment. Bill Clinton, the President, and Al Gore, suggest that they’ll give us a tax cut, but only if we do exactly what they want us to do. That isn’t America. That’s social engineering. The tax code should reflect our values in a Judeo-Christian sense, that work, honesty and integrity and contracts and property and investment and savings should be rewarded, and Bob Dole and Jack Kemp are not only going to cut the tax rates across the board and lower the Capital Gain Tax. I’ll be glad to talk about it a little later, because there’s not enough time, but we are going to repeal the 83-year-old code and replace the seven and a half million words with a flatter, fairer, simpler code that will take this country roaring in the 21st Century.
GORE: This risky tax scheme would blow a hole in the deficit. You don’t have to take my word for it. “Time,” “Newsweek,” “U.S. News & World Report,” “Business Week,” 83 percent of hundreds of economists in a random survey just recently all said it would blow a hole in the deficit. There’s another feature I would like to hear Mr. Kemp speak about. Just before he joined Senator Dole on the ticket, he said that the plan — the part of the plan that raises taxes on 9 million of the hardest working families in America was unconscionable, that means it’s wrong and it shouldn’t happen. I agree, it is still part of the plan. We believe that taxes should not be increased on those families. We have a plan to cut taxes on middle income families within a balanced budget plan, eliminating the deficit and protecting Medicare, Medicaid, education and the environment.
LEHRER: Mr. Kemp?
KEMP: Every time this country in the 20th Century has cut tax rates across the board, revenues went up, the economy grew, and I am surprised at this point in his career that Vice President Gore and the President cannot understand that you get more revenue from a bigger pie, and clearly, creating more jobs reduces the social welfare drain, clearly makes more opportunity for capital to be invested in our inner cities. And frankly, Al, we shouldn’t just tinker with the Capital Gain Tax, we should eliminate it in the inner cities of America to put capital to work to make democratic capitalism and jobs available in our inner cities of the United States.
LEHRER: Mr. Vice President, should federal government Affirmative Action programs be continued?
GORE: Yes. President Clinton addressed this issue when he said, “Mend it, don’t end it.” Diversity is a great strength in America. Look around the world at other places where they have not paid attention to the necessity of promoting harmony of, between different ethnic, racial and religious, and cultural groups. We ought to be very proud in our country, as most Americans are, that we’ve made tremendous progress, but we ought to recognize that we have more work to do. Now, the first thing that we are trying to do is to create a million new jobs in the inner cities of this country, with tax credits for employers who hire people who are now unemployed. We are seeking to have vigorous enforcement of the laws that bar discrimination. Now, I want to congratulate Mr. Kemp for being a lonely voice in the Republican party over the years on this question. It is — it is with some sadness that I refer to the fact that the day after he joined Senator Dole’s ticket, he announced that he was changing his position and was hereto, thereafter going to adopt Senator Dole’s position to end all affirmative action. That’s not good for our country. Bill Clinton and I believe that the United States of America has its brightest days ahead, and we will see them even brighter if we promote diversity and harmony among all our people.
LEHRER: Mr. Kemp?
KEMP: Jim, my position on Affirmative Action has been clear ever since I left the professional football career for Congress in 1970. Some people think I quit playing a few years earlier, but I retired in 1970. My life has been dedicated to equality of opportunity and our democracy should provide that, not equality of reward. Uh, Affirmative Action should be predicated upon need, not equality of reward, not equality of outcome. Quotas have always been against the American ideal. We should promote diversity and we should do it the way Bob Dole has been talking about, with a new civil rights agenda, based upon expanding access to credit and capital, job opportunities, educational choice in our inner cities for a young urban mother who can’t get the type of an education she wants for her child, and, ultimately, the type of ownership and entrepreneurship from public housing in, D.C. to Nickerson Gardens in Watts, Los Angeles. People need to own. And that’s what Abraham Lincoln believed. That when people own something, they have a stake in the American dream. That is Affirmative Action in America.
LEHRER: Mr. Vice President.
GORE: With all due respect, I do not believe that Abraham Lincoln would have adopted Bob Dole’s position to end all affirmative action. There is a specific measure on the ballot in California. It was embodied in legislation, introduced by Senator Dole, to apply to the whole nation. Mr. Kemp campaigned against it, spoke against it, wrote letters against it, went to California to fight against it, and now has endorsed it. I don’t think it’s a minor matter. I think this is one of the most important challenges that our country has to face in the future, and I hope that Mr. Kemp will try to persuade Senator Dole to adopt Mr. Kemp’s position, instead of the other way around.
LEHRER: Mr. Kemp, what is your position?
KEMP: That red light means we’re supposed to stop?
LEHRER: Right.
GORE: You thought that was going to be your problem, not mine. [ Laughter ]
KEMP: Yeah, right. I can’t believe I’m keeping within the time limit.
LEHRER: Mr. Kemp, do we have a serious race problem in the United States right now?
KEMP: Yeah, we really do. Um, this country has yet to deal with the type of inclusionary policies. It is so very important for Americans, white and black, Jew and Christian, immigrant and native-born, to sit down and talk and listen and begin to understand what it’s like to come from that different perspective. Our country is as the Kerner Commission Report suggested a number of years ago was being split, but they said between white and black. I think it’s being split, Jim, not so much between white and black, although that’s still a very serious problem. We really have two economies. Our general economy, our national economy, our mainstream economy is democratic, is based on incentives, a small “d” Al, it’s capitalism and incentives for working and saving and investing and producing, and families and the things that really lead to progress up that ladder that we call “The American Dream,” but is what is really universal. But unfortunately, in urban America, and I was glad to hear the Vice President talk a little bit about it, uh there — they have abandoned the inner cities. There’s a socialist economy. There’s no private housing. There’s mostly public housing. You’re told where to go to school, you’re told what to buy with food stamps. It is a welfare system that is more like a third-world socialist country than what we would expect from the world’s greatest democratic free-enterprise system. That must change, and it will under Bob Dole and Jack Kemp.
GORE: Remember what I said just a moment ago. If it were not so, he would have told you. The problems between races in America must be addressed. The good news is we’re making progress. We’ve seen 10.5 million new jobs created in the last four years. We’ve seen the unemployment rate come down dramatically. We’ve seen the African-American unemployment rate go below double digits for the first time in 25 years and it stayed below for 25 months in a row. We have empowerment zones and enterprise communities, 105 of them in communities all across the United States of America. Let me tell you a story about Joann Crowder in Detroit. She was on welfare for eight years until the empowerment zone was created there. She just got a job in the new business that — that launched its enterprise right in that empowerment zone. We want to do that for millions more all across the country.
KEMP: Well, with all due respect, Jim, there are nine empowerment zones, a few little tinkering with tax credits around the country for inner cities. Los Angeles, after the riots, did not even get an empowerment zone, believe it or not. That is just unconscionable in America to have left Watts, South Central and East L.A. out. Earl Graves of “Black Enterprise” magazine said the single greatest deterrent to black advancement is the lack of access to capital, the credit and ownership. That will change. We will green-line every city in the United States where there is unemployment and welfare and we will eliminate the Capital Gains Tax, eliminate the tax on a welfare mother that takes a job. That is the answer. Give ownership and entrepreneurship to low income people based on need, not the color of their skin.
LEHRER: Mr. Vice President, if re-elected, what would, what could we look forward to in the way of an inner city policy from a Clinton/Gore second term?
GORE: Before I answer that specific question, let me say that we did put an empowerment zone in South Central, Los Angeles. It is in the form of the largest community development financial institution ever created in the United States or in any other country and it is creating jobs in South Central, Los Angeles right now. The Congress passed uh an enterprise zone after the Los Angeles riots five years ago. It was vetoed by the prior administration. Now, to your question. We have a specific plan to create 1 million new jobs in the inner cities of America with tax credits for employers who hire people coming off welfare, ’cause we’ve passed welfare reform now, we promised to end welfare as we know it. And we are implementing this new legislation. We have moved 1.9 million people off of the welfare rolls and into good jobs in the last four years. Our new plan is to have 1 million more jobs in the inner cities, but that’s not all. We are also implementing the plan to put 100,000 community police officers in our cities. We’ve already got 20,000 out there. We’re ahead of our six-year schedule. As a matter of fact, there’re 8 here in St. Petersburg, already on the beat, you may run into one of them leaving this auditorium tonight. St. Petersburg is safer because of this urban agenda that we’re following. We want the focus to be on millions more jobs, and we’re very optimistic that it’s gonna happen.
KEMP: Well, we’ve had four years and there’s no enterprise zone. There are empowerment zones, but you have to do what Bill Clinton and Al Gore want you to do. You get a $5,000 tax credit if you hire somebody that’s unemployed, but you’ve already got to have an existing business. The answer is to say, once again, green-line any area in America that has been red-lined for lack of mortgage money, lack of credit and capital. Just say that area qualifies for no Capital Gains Tax, zero, nada. That’s what Eleanor Holmes Norton wants to do in the District of Columbia and this administration said to D.C., Drop dead. Drop dead. We don’t want to change the legislation that would lower the tax rate in D.C., allow welfare mothers to take a job without any tax on the first 90 percent of her income and no Capital Gain Tax that should be done in every urban area of America that would make capital flow back, and you can’t have capitalism, Al, without capital. You may want to give a tax credit, but it won’t work.
GORE: Well, we have 105 empowerment zones and enterprise communities all across the United States of America, and with all due respect, that’s 105 more than were there when we came into the White House. We have been implementing them in a determined way. They are making a difference. You know, that empowerment zone that I mentioned in Detroit is creating jobs not only for Joann Crowder, who feels proud that she’s off of welfare now, and we’re proud of her. It’s creating jobs for hundreds of others, and similar initiatives are working in the other empowerment zones.
LEHRER: Mr. Kemp, you said recently that one of the problems related to this was that all the capital was in the hands of the white people. What did you mean by that?
KEMP: The single greatest problem in our opinion, domestic — in the domestic economy, is that this tax code, 83 years old, a relic of the Cold War and Hot War, inflation and depression, seven-and-a-half million words long, overtaxes capital, overtaxes working men and women and families. Clearly, the Gordian knot needs to be broken in one fell swoop. Bob Dole and Jack Kemp, as soon as we get through this first step of cutting tax rates across the board, are going to repeal the whole code while Bill Clinton and my friend, Al Gore, defend the status quo. We’re going to repeal the seven-and-a-half million words of the U.S.tax code, make it tax income once, not twice, three, four, and if you die, it confiscates your estate. We must have a tax code going into the 21st Century that does not protect the establishment and this tax code does. And by cutting and eliminating the Capital Gains, by cutting and eliminating the Estate Tax, by bringing the top tax rate down to something reasonable, like — here he goes again — I think in peacetime, it shouldn’t be higher, Bob, and I don’t think it should be higher than 25 percent, phased in. But capital would flow out into the economy. We have people getting access to capital. Small businessmen and women, African-American, Asian Americans, Latino Americans, female Americans would be able to start their businesses. Dana Crist of Lancaster said the day the tax bill is passed in Congress, she will open a new factory with 40 or 50 or 60 employees in Lancaster, Pennsylvania. He’ll call that trickle down. I’ll call it Niagara Falls.
GORE: The problem with this version of Niagara Falls is that Senator Dole and Mr. Kemp would put the economy in a barrel and send it over the falls. [ Laughter ] It is a risky, $550-billion tax scheme that actually raises taxes on 9 million of the hardest working families. Again, Mr. Kemp opposed that and called it unconscionable. Now, it is part of the plan that he is supporting. Not only that, though, it would blow a hole in the deficit, it would raise interest rates. That means higher mortgage payments, particularly those with the variable rate mortgages, higher car payments, he would also lead to much deeper cuts in Medicare, Medicaid, education and the environment. It is extremely risky. And as for these harsh words, I don’t take them personally. He said much worse about Bob Dole when he said Bob Dole never met a tax that he didn’t hike. He wrote about 450 separate provisions in that code. You better check with him before you eliminate it completely. He may be getting royalties.
KEMP: Jim, a $550-billion tax cut, this is something that Al does not want to mention, has to be viewed against the context of a $50-trillion U.S. economy output of goods and services over the next six years. A $550-billion tax cut in a $50-trillion economy over six years is one-and-a-half percent, and the only hole it would blow is a hole in the plans of this administration to try to tinker with the tax code and defend the indefensible. It would blow up the bureaucracy, but you would expand the economy. That’s important for America.
LEHRER: Mr. Vice President, what about Mr. Kemp’s point that he’s made a couple of times that what we need is to throw away the current — the present tax code and write a whole new tax system. Do you agree with that?
GORE: We’ve passed the Taxpayer Bill of Rights. We have fought for new provisions that now make it possible to file over the telephone. We are fighting for tax reforms across-the-board, and most importantly, we have a plan on the table right now to cut taxes on middle income families with several specific provisions. We already cut taxes on 15 million working families in this county, with an average of about $1,000 in tax relief to those making $25,000 a year or less. And for the last two years, we have had middle-income tax cuts on the table in the Congress and they would not — they weren’t accepted by Bob Dole and Newt Gingrich, because they said they would not pass them without cutting deeply into Medicare, Medicaid, education and the environment. We are determined to move forward during these next four years, with the tax cuts that president Bill Clinton has proposed. Here they are again: A $1500 tax credit for tuition, a $10,000 tax deduction so that no family pays taxes on the money for college tuition, capital gains eliminated for the sale of a home, a tax break for first-time home buyers and for health care expenses and a $500 child tax credit.
KEMP: You only get a tax cut in the Clinton administration if you do exactly what Al Gore and Bill Clinton want you to do. That’s not America. When John F. Kennedy cut tax rates, the economy grew, unemployment went down and we balanced the budget, and revenues went up. Indeed, the Secretary of Treasury under John F. Kennedy and the Deputy Secretary of Treasury under John F. Kennedy endorsed Bob Dole’s plan to cut rates, cut the Capital Gains Tax, balance the budget, provide a $500 tax credit, and, clearly, the plan should be to lift the economy, to get more revenues. Medicare will be saved because it will be put into a commission where both Bill Clinton and Bob Dole recognize it has to be studied by the same people that would study — or did study, I should say, the Social Security System and saved it in 1983 and ’84. Look, we can bring down government — the growth of government spending, but we have to grow the economy. And in Bob Dole and Jack Kemp’s opinion, we should aim at doubling the size of the American economy in the next 15 years. Under their policies, it will take 30 to 40 years. That’s not acceptable.
GORE: The chairman of their national campaign steering committee, Senator D’Amato, said that Bob Dole would have to cut into Medicare in order to pay for this proposal, but that he would wait until after the election to do it. The proposal to cut Medicare that Senator Dole pushed before, and shut down the government to try to enact, would have already raised by $268, the fees paid by the average couple now on Medicare. He tried to double the deductibles and give people less in return. We have a balanced budget plan that protects Medicare and gives tax cuts.
LEHRER: Mr. Kemp, is it really possible to balance the budget without reforming drastically the entitlements programs, including Social Security and Medicare?
KEMP: Before I answer that, Jim, let me just say it is disgraceful, the campaign being waged to scare the American senior citizens, in this state and my home state of, well, New York and California, about Medicare.
GORE: One other one in there, isn’t there?
KEMP: about Medicare Yeah, Maryland now. The amount of money being spent to try to mislead the American people is demagoguery, and only in the Clinton White House and in Al Gore’s mind could an increase in spending per capita on a senior citizen from $4800 in 1996 to $7200 over the next five years be considered a cut. Does anybody think that Bob Dole, who almost gave his life for his country, who has served in the Senate, who helped save Social Security, crawled out of a fox hole on Riva Ridge in Northern Italy in 1945 to save a wounded radioman? Does anybody think in this country that he could possibly want to move our country ahead and leave anybody behind? Of course, we can balance the budget. Of course, we have to hold down the growth in entitlement spending. But clearly, you cannot balance the budget, Jim, without growing this economy. It’s only growing at about two-and-a-half percent. We should double the rate of growth and double the size of American economy. This means more jobs, more wealth, more income and more capital, particularly for our nation’s poor and those left behind.
GORE: Mr. Lehrer, our balanced budget plan extends the Medicare Trust Fund ten years into the future. A commission is fine, but a commission would not do any good if we adopted this risky $550-billion tax scheme. The word “scary” has been used. A couple of days ago I went with Governor Lawton Chiles, who was here, to Sarasota to the Friendship Senior Center. I talked with a woman there named Dorothy Wornell and she said, “You know, we may not be as sophisticated as some of those people in Washington, but we can add and subtract.” Here are the numbers she’s adding and subtracting. Bob Dole’s plan would have already imposed an extra $268 on the average Medicare receiving couple, and his plan would have doubled deductibles. It would have cost an extra $1,700 over the lifetime of his plan and eliminated nursing home standards and guarantees of nursing home care for seniors. Bill Clinton prevented it from happening. We will never allow that to happen.
KEMP: Jim, Medicare is too important to senior citizens around this country to play the type of politics that is being played on this issue. It is losing $8 billion as we stand here tonight. By the President’s own trustees of Medicare, three members of which serve in his cabinet, it will be losing $23 billion a year by 1998. Something must be done. Bob Dole is — has suggested a commission, but, clearly, you cannot save Medicare, Social Security, or any program for the social welfare net of American people, under which they should not be allowed to fall, unless we grow this economy at least twice the rate it is growing today. That is the issue, not scaring people in America.
LEHRER: Mr. Vice President, Mr. Kemp has accused you of demagoguery.
GORE: Well, as I said before, he used much harsher language when he talked about Bob Dole. He said that Bob Dole’s solution for every single problem was to increase taxes. He said just two years ago that the Bob Dole tax increase of 1982 was the largest tax increase in the history of the world, but let’s get to the point. Medicare has been adjusted 23 times since it was created in 1965. Bob Dole, incidentally, just bragged this year that he was one of only 12 people who voted against the creation of Medicare in the first place. I don’t think he’s — he didn’t believe in it then, and the plan that he promoted last year would have certainly been devastating to Medicare. Again, don’t take my word for it. The American Hospital Association said it could have closed 700 hospitals. The Catholic Health Association, the AARP, and many other groups who pay careful attention to Medicare said that the Dole/Gingrich plan on Medicare would have led to deep cuts, possibly set up a two-tiered system, and would have ended the kind of Medicare system that we have. Our plan extends Medicare ten years into the future. We will always protect Medicare within the context of a balanced budget plan.
KEMP: Folks, they have no plan. They have absolutely no plan. The President himself suggested that the reduction in the growth of Medicare over the next five or six years ought to be held to 6 percent under the Republican plan, irrespective of the numbers, it will grow at 7 or even more percent, but that is beside the point. What has to be discussed is how we, as a nation, are going to create the size of an economy, create a national wealth that would at least double this 6 or 7 trillion economy. We would have $6 trillion in 15 years extra wealth for the American people. Another trillion dollars of revenue, with which to save Medicare and Social Security. And you can’t do it with a tax code and a regulatory code and people suing each other with frivolous suits, as this administration is allowing to happen. That has to change, and it will under Bob Dole and Jack Kemp.
GORE: I think Mr. Kemp has unintentionally made a mistake in saying that President Clinton called for reduction of — to 6 percent or whatever you said. I believe you were referring to the “Money” magazine interview, and the publisher of “Money” magazine just sent Mr. Kemp a letter two days ago asking him to please stop inaccurately citing “Money” magazine. It is not what the President said. It is not the President’s position. Let me make clear what his position is. We will save Medicare. We will stop efforts to hurt Medicare, and we’ll do it within a balanced budget plan.
LEHRER: Mr. Kemp, what, if anything, would a Dole/Kemp administration do to change the current legal status of abortion in this country?
KEMP: I will answer the question, but for the record, I would like to release the letter to our friends in the press of the letter I got from “Money” magazine, suggesting that Bill Clinton wanted and did lower the cost of living allowance for senior citizens as a way of reducing Social Security. Putting that aside, the — we recognize there’s no consensus in America. This country is split between those who call themselves pro-choice, and I’m sure, very sincerely, and those of us who call ourselves pro-life, this is a very emotional issue. I’m sure it is for a woman. It certainly is for those of us like my wife and myself who have three adopted grandchildren. We thank God every night of our life that a young woman was given a choice, was given the opportunity to choose life. This country should not be torn asunder over this debate, it has to be carried out with civility and respect, and Bob and I believe it can be. But we should recognize that every human life is precious and there should be all of the protection that we can give for an unborn human being. And to think that in this country, for every three births, there is one abortion. But even worse than that, as ugly as that might be — and I know it’s a tragedy to many people both on the pro-choice and pro-life position — we have a President who vetoed a congressional ban on the ugly and gruesome practice of snatching life away from a child just moments before he or she enters the world. That is unacceptable.
LEHRER: Mr. Vice President?
GORE: President Clinton has made it clear that he will sign legislation outlawing procedures such as this if there is a — an exception to protect the health of the mother where serious health consequences, such as the inability to have any further children, are involved and her doctor advises her so. What is really at stake here is whether or not women will have the right to choose. The platform on which Mr. Kemp and Senator Dole are running pledges a constitutional amendment to take away a woman’s right to choose and to have the government come in and order that woman to do what the government says, no matter what the circumstances. Mr. Kemp has voted 47 out of 47 times to have such an amendment and to restrict this completely, no matter what the circumstances, even where rape and incest is involved. We will never allow a woman’s right to choose to be taken away.
KEMP: There is no consensus. A constitutional amendment would not pass. We must use persuasion, not intimidation. Bob Dole and Jack Kemp will try to remind the American people of what a tremendous asset our children are and why there should be protection for innocent human life, including that of the unborn. But to think that this administration vetoed the one chance they had to ban that practice without working with people in the Congress who would have loved to have had the opportunity to stop that gruesome practice is just unacceptable to the American people. And Bob Dole would never have vetoed that ban on partial-birth abortions in the third trimester of a woman’s pregnancy.
LEHRER: Mr. Vice President, is the war in Bosnia really over, or is it going to break out again once the U.S. and the NATO troops leave?
GORE: The fighting has stopped in Bosnia. President Bill Clinton showed tremendous courage, vision, wisdom, and leadership in having our country take the lead in rallying our allies, bringing the warring factions together in Dayton, Ohio, and hammering out a peace agreement that has ended the war in Bosnia. We hope that it will stay over with. Elections having just been held. There is great progress towards peace and reconciliation in Bosnia. We ought to be very proud of our soldiers who have played such a critical role in bringing about this peace in Bosnia. It’s not the only case where Bill Clinton has provided such leadership. We have restored democracy to Haiti, with scarcely a shot being fired. We have seen movement towards reconciliation in Northern Ireland and in the Middle East. The Bible says there will always be wars and rumors of wars. As the President said the other night, there will always be troubles in this ol’ world, but the United States of America can be counted on to provide the vision that the world looks for from the United States of America. Bill Clinton, as President, has provided that kind of leadership. We are more secure and stronger today because of Bill Clinton’s handling of foreign policy.
KEMP: Bob Dole supported the deployment of troops in Bosnia, but the problem with the foreign policy of this administration, there is none. It is ambiguous, it is contradictory. It is precipitous to go into Iraq with bombing before we had even consulted with our allies. To think that Sam Nunn of Georgia or Colin Powell helped put together the coalition in the Persian Gulf were not even consulted. It was not only precipitous, it was a sign, not of strength, but of weakness. What’s worse, they declared victory. They’ve declared victory in every deployment. We’ve had more deployments in four years than any previous four years I can think of, and I’m 61 years of age. It’s unbelievable that ambiguity can be called foreign policy. Let me say what a friend told me, and I believed it for my whole career, weakness is provocative and our message should be clear. And that’s what our message would be to the world under Bob Dole as Commander-in-Chief of the United States of America.
GORE: We did, of course, consult with our allies before we bombed Saddam Hussein, but sometimes the United States has to take unilateral action when our interests are at stake. General Schwarzkopf is in the audience tonight. We’re awfully proud of the way he led our coalition, organized under former President Bush. When the United States toward the repulsing of Saddam Hussein from Kuwait, three times as he’s tried to get out of that box, Saddam Hussein has felt the sting of a swift, certain response from the United States of America under President Bill Clinton.
LEHRER: Mr. Kemp, Senator Dole has criticized the President on Haiti, that he handled that wrong. What did he do wrong?
KEMP: Well, it was Bob Dole that suggested that there be a fact-finding commission. President Carter was on it. Colin Powell was on it. You cannot say, in our opinion, that Haiti is a great success. Clearly, uh it was maybe the right thing to do, but we did not go in with enough information. We caused problems in the first place by denying Caribbean countries and third-world countries a chance to trade freely in the United States. It causes economic problems and turmoil, and then we turn around, as we did in Mexico, having to bail them out. We caused the problem in the first place, and it cost us 20 to 50 billion to bail them out. Haiti is very ambiguous at best. We pray that democracy comes to Haiti, but so far, the message from Haiti is quite ambiguous, notwithstanding the declaration of victory by this administration.
GORE: Well, I didn’t hear anything wrong. The fact is, we restored democracy to Haiti. When I say “restored” actually, it’s the first real democracy that Haiti has ever had. And it happened with scarcely any shots being fired. I was in the Oval Office the night when President Clinton dispatched our troops from Ft. Bragg. It was a tense moment. The planes were in the air and our negotiators were talking with the dictator down there. And when that dictator got the news from his spies outside the gate that all these planes were taking off, he said, let’s get out of here. That’s how it was done. It was one of the most deft uses of diplomacy and military force in combination that you will find anywhere in the annals of the history of this country. I was so proud of our President in the way he handled that, and the result, so far, is excellent. And we hope and pray that it will remain that way.
KEMP: Many more results like Bosnia and Haiti and Mexico, and the Middle East, and we won’t have much success. One of the most serious — one of the most serious problems was the tremendous effort by this administration to force on Mexico a devaluation of their peso. The economy has dropped by almost 40 to 50 percent. Then we go in and bail them out. We caused the problem, then we have to bail them out. We should have a foreign policy that’s predicated upon trade, on spreading democracy, by giving people opportunities to trade freely with us, and making sure that everybody recognizes a rule of the Golden Rule, “To do unto others to have them do unto you.” Diplomacy first, and don’t bomb before breakfast.
LEHRER: Mr. Vice President, Mexico, we caused the problem, then had to go in and bail them out?
GORE: No, that’s not right. When Mr. Kemp started talking about the Golden Rule, I thought he was going to talk about the gold standard again. That used to be an integral part of this so-called “Supply Side Economics,” but it may be something else that he now agrees with Bob Dole on, because Bob Dole voted to take us off the gold standard, a wise vote in my opinion. Most — all economists say that if we did that, it would throw us into a deep recession or depression and put millions out of work, but let me come directly to this question. No, when there was a crisis involving the Mexican peso, again, President Bill Clinton showed bold and dynamic leadership. I want to hasten to add that Senator Bob Dole gave critical bipartisan support at the time. He agreed with the President. He supported the President. He said this is a wise move. He could not get a majority in the Senate, and Speaker Gingrich could not get a majority in the house to go on record in support of it. So, the President, as presidents often have to do, went alone and did the right thing. You know, people said it was a big risk at that time. We’ve ended up making a $500 million profit. All of the loans have been paid back. We’re using that $500 million to further reduce the deficit. It’s come down 60 percent already. It’s going down even more toward a balanced budget, and this is helping.
KEMP: It’s unbelievable that we could cause a drop in the standard of living of a friendly country like Mexico by nearly 40 to 50 percent. Unemployment goes up, we send U.S. tax dollars and IMF monies to Mexico, and we make a profit. At that level, that is — gives new meaning to the word “profitability” for U.S. foreign policy. The pain, the suffering, the unemployment, the bankruptcies, the loss of the standard of living, the people who have had to come across the border of California, Arizona, New Mexico and Texas if that’s our foreign policy for the third-world or Latin America, I believe more than ever, we have to elect a president who understands trade, who understands honest money, who understands private enterprise, who understands democratic capitalism, not socialism caused by the IMF and the Clinton administration.
GORE: Well, I fail to understand the basis of the charge that we caused the monetary crisis in Mexico. They managed their own monetary policy. Years ago, we used to hear this phrase in American politics, the “Blame America First” crowd. I never liked that phrase, but if it was going to be applied today, it would have to be applied to this statement. The United States of America shouldn’t be blamed for the management of Mexico’s monetary policy. We helped our neighbor in an hour of need, and they survived. They’re stronger. They’re coming back. They paid us back, and we got a dividend in the process.
LEHRER: Mr. Kemp, Senator Dole the other night criticized President Clinton for cutting defense spending and, thus, cutting jobs in California. Is that how defense spending should be seen, as a jobs program as well?
KEMP: I don’t think, Jim, that Bob Dole was suggesting that the defense of our country is a jobs or a socioeconomic program, but it’s clear that the defense budget of this administration has taken defense as a percent of our national economy to a lower level than it was prior to Pearl Harbor. That’s dangerous and it’s provocative. And the mixed message, the ambiguities of U.S. foreign policy, uh are — I believe, and Bob Dole believes, is causing not only problems for this country throughout the world, but particularly here at home. And the type of changes that were made overnight in California caused very severe dislocations. And then, of course, the President ran out to California and announced, well, maybe we’ll have another B-1or B-2 Bomber. But that is not the way policy should be made. It should be predicated upon the defense needs, the security needs, the strategic needs of the United States of America, and that’s how they’ll be made under Bob Dole as president.
GORE: Well, first of all, there are virtually no large differences in the defense budgets put forward by President Clinton and put forward by the majority in the Congress in the last two years. They’re very, very similar. There is a huge difference in our economic plan. This risky $550-billion tax scheme that I talked about earlier is said by the Concord Coalition, including Republicans like Pete Peterson and Warren Rudman, to pose a threat to our nation’s ability to have a sensible defense budget in the future. They’ve gone on record as saying that this tax scheme would not only raise taxes on 9 million hard-working American families, but would also lead, almost inevitably, to deep cuts in Medicare and in defense. We have a balanced budget plan that protects the defense budget, also Medicare, Medicaid, education, the environment, and give tax — gives tax cuts to middle-income families.
KEMP: Jim, Al has to hear one more time. Every time in this century we’ve lowered the tax rates across-the-board on employment, on saving, investment, and risk-taking in this economy, revenues went up, not down. Now, if the purpose of the tax code is to raise revenue. We ought to think, as John F. Kennedy did, about lowering the rates. We can’t go to zero. They can’t go too low, because there’s not enough revenue, but President Clinton apologized in Houston for saying, whoops, I raised your taxes and they’re too high. President Bush apologized for raising taxes. Bob Dole knows that the rates have to come down across-the-board and then we’ll get to the most important part, to repeal this code and go to a new system for the 21st Century.
LEHRER: Mr. Vice President, some Democrats have charged that the environment would be in jeopardy if Mr. Kemp and Senator Dole are elected. Do you share that fear?
GORE: I certainly do. Let me first say that. In citing John F. Kennedy’s tax cut in the 1960s, I want to also remind you that Mr. Kemp has pointed out in the past, Bob Dole was in the Congress then. He was one of those who voted against John F. Kennedy’s tax cut. The environment faces dire threats from the kind of legislation that Senator Dole and Speaker Newt Gingrich tried to pass by shutting down the government and attempting to force President Clinton to accept it. They invited the lobbyists for the biggest polluters in America to come into the Congress and literally rewrite the Clean Water Act and the Clean Air Act. President Clinton stopped them dead in their tracks. We have a positive agenda on the environment because we believe very deeply that it’s about our children and our future. Clean air and clean water, cleaning up toxic waste sites, when millions of children live within one mile of them. That’s important. We have a plan to clean up two-thirds of the toxic waste sites in America over the next four years. We’ve already cleaned up more in the last three years than the previous two administrations did in 12. The President just set aside the Utah National Monument. He is protecting the Everglades here in Florida. Bob Dole is opposed to that plan. President Bill Clinton will protect our environment and prevent the kind of attacks on it that we saw in the last Congress and are included in the Republican platform.
KEMP: And so will Bob Dole. I mean, Al, get real. Franklin Roosevelt said in 1932 that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself. The only thing, Jim, they have to offer is fear. Fear of the environment, fear of the climate, fear of Medicare, fear of Newt, fear of Republicans, fear of Bob, and probably fear of cutting tax rates. They ain’t seen nothing yet. Look, we recognize that this country has to live in balance with our environment. Every one of us who have children and grandchildren recognize how we have to reach a balance. It is not jobs versus our environment. Both are important. This is the most overregulated, overly litigated economy in our nation’s history. And to call a businessman or woman who sits down and has a chance to express his or her interest in how to make these laws work and call them a polluter is just outrageous. It is typical of the anti-capitalistic mentality of this administration. That will change, because we believe in democratic capitalism for everybody.
GORE: There are lots of jobs to be created in cleaning up the environment. All around the world we’re seeing problems that people want to solve because they love their children. They want them to be able to drink clean water and breathe clean air. They don’t want them to live next to toxic waste sites. When the United States of America takes the lead in protecting the environment, we do right by our children, and we also create new business opportunities, new jobs, new sources of prosperity for the United States of America, and we’re going about it in a common sense way.
LEHRER: Mr. Kemp, you mentioned it already before and you said on “Meet the Press” Sunday that the federal government engages in “regulation reign of terror.” What exactly do you mean?
KEMP: Well, exactly just what I said. Regulations that take property or reduce the value of some farmer or rancher or homeowner’s property for wetlands or endangered species and take that property or reduce its value without compensating the owner. That is a reign of terror. It’s happening. In Oregon, not too long ago, a farmer took 25 percent of his property and declared it a wetland. It had the runoff of snow that allowed it to be declared a wetland, but he did it himself voluntarily. He found within a couple of years that the Bald Eagle began to use it as a habitat. The Corporations of Engineers, the Bureau of Wildlife and Fisheries, all of the federal agencies came onto his property, declared it a federal wetland and said he couldn’t drive. They took away the road, he couldn’t mend his fences and they wouldn’t pay the value of the loss of the — they wouldn’t pay — or compensate, I should say, for the loss of value to that property. How can we, as a free society, turn people into enemies or adversaries of the United States government? OSHA does it, EPA does it, ERDA does it. And you name it. We should recognize that this country lives in such a way as to build an alliance with our free enterprise system that can build a better America for our children and our grandchildren. We can do it. But it’s got to take new leadership in Washington.
GORE: Well, it takes values that recognize the importance of the environment. Mr. Kemp voted against the Clean Water Act, voted against the renewal of the Superfund Act. We have been taking a new approach, protecting the environment, but getting rid of unnecessary regulations. We’re eliminating 16,000 pages of regulations. We’ve entered a — into a new project called project XL. This is at the EPA. Where we enter into a bargain with businesses. When they say we’ll exceed the standards, we give the EPA a way to measure the progress and throw away the rulebook all together. Now this is the kind of common sense approach that can clean up the environment while eliminating unnecessary red tape. Make no mistake about it, though, there are those who would like to go much further. Some have even proposed and this bill he cites would do it, that polluters ought to be paid if they agree to stop dumping poisons into the river. The pay polluters provision is wrong. We fought against it. We’ll never allow that.
KEMP: When I went to Congress from Buffalo in 1970, you could almost walk across Lake Erie because of the pollution. Today, thanks to the secondary and tertiary treatment plants, which many of us voted for on both sides of the aisle, which actually started under Richard Nixon, a Republican president, our water is cleaner in the Great Lakes. We’ve got a lot of progress that we’ve made and we’ve got to make more, but to turn the country into a regulatory effort by the federal government to suggest that we can’t work in harmony, “A” with the environment, and with business is a big mistake. We should use incentives, not always using uh sticks against business in America and the jobs it creates.
LEHRER: Mr. Vice President, does the government of the — of the United States as now operated by the Clinton Administration operate on a reign of terror, through a reign of terror?
GORE: No, of course not. We’re taking a brand new approach to eliminate unnecessary regulations, unnecessary bureaucracy. We’ve got lots of examples of this there was a story in the newspaper the other day about a home testing kit that the FDA had held up. That happened under a rule in the last administration. We said change that rule. It’s being changed now. It’s under consideration by the FDA right now and it will be changed. There are thousands of other examples. We believe that there is a new approach. Let me give you an example from OSHA. We’re reinventing the way OSHA does its job. Some people would like to eliminate OSHA. We think that the protection of job safety in the workplace is very, very important, but what we’ve said is look, start, start measuring the results. We found that the inspectors were being rewarded on the basis of how many fines they issued. We changed that completely. They used to go in and give somebody a fine if they didn’t have a poster on the wall informing employees of their rights. To use this as an example of our new approach, now if they go in and see that poster is not there, they go out to the trunk of the car and give them a poster. It’s the same approach that we’re taking in all the regulatory agencies. We’re making a lot of progress. We want the protection with common sense, not nonsense.
KEMP: Well, we have to have the type of economic prosperity that will allow us to generate the revenues to provide this technology. 10% of all the emissions — 10% of the all the hydrocarbon emissions oxides going into the air caused by 10% — 100% of the all the emissions are caused by 10% of the automobiles. Now there is technology that would allow infrared technology to be used to identify those cars that are providing or the pollution in our atmosphere. It is not being able to be used because we are going to take every automobile driver in America, all 110 million automobiles, and charge them 17 or 20 or $25. Look, we ought to go after the ones that pollute, not go after the men and women who want to be able to drive their automobile to work or to school and to make sure that they have the type of opportunity to live like everyone else without having themselves regulated by Washington establishment. We can use technology. That’s the answer, but to get the technology, you’ve got to have a growing economy. This economy is not growing fast enough and it will under Bob Dole and Jack Kemp.
GORE: Well, the economy is growing very strongly right now. We’ve had 10.5 million new jobs created just in the last four years. In the last quarter, the growth rate was 4.7%. The average growth rate is also coming up. It is higher than in either of the last two Republican administrations. Bob Dole said in February of this year this is the strongest economy in 30 years. The conservative business journal, “Barron’s,” says this is the strongest economy in 30 years. We’ve got good solid growth. Let’s don’t risk it on some $550-billion risky scheme.
LEHRER: What measurement do you use, Mr. Kemp, in saying the economy is not growing the way it should be?
KEMP: Well, as I said earlier, Jim, it takes two bread winners to do what one breadwinner could have done just a relatively few short few years ago. As long as a woman or man wants to go to work it ought to be their choice, but in America today that woman or man must work in a family to, one to pay the tax and the other to help the family. That’s not America. It doesn’t leave enough time for the children. It doesn’t leave enough time for people to enjoy their families. It doesn’t allow people to save. The family is the most overtaxed institution in the United States of America. When I was growing up in Los Angeles, a family that median level of income might have sent four or five percent of their income to the federal government. Today, it’s close to 30, or at least 27 or 28%. That’s just unacceptable, and for Al Gore to keep suggesting that we can’t afford to reduce the tax rates across-the-board on the American people and on the formation of the capital necessary to create the new jobs for America is just totally at odds with the experience of both Ronald Reagan, John F. Kennedy and other times in this century. One other thing that’s very, very important. To call it a risky scheme reminds me of the fact that this administration is suggesting that they’re going to give you a tax cut if you’ll do what they want you to do. They want to cut the Capital Gain Tax, but only for home owners. How about the small businessmen and women of America that create 91% of all the new jobs? My Daddy was a truck driver who bought the truck and started a company. We need more truck drivers becoming truck owners and they can’t do it if they don’t have access to the capital and the seed corn for the next generation of truck and jobs for America.
GORE: We’ve had the creation of more new small businesses in the last four years in each of the last three years than in any other year in all of American history. We’ve seen the creation of 10.5 million new jobs. We have the lowest combined rate of inflation and unemployment in 30 years. “Business Week” magazine said these are the kind of results that you want. Lower inflation, lower interest rates, more jobs and more growth, all within the context of a balanced budget. We have reduced the budget deficit four years in a row. We’ve cut it down 60 percent. After it went up by almost 300 percent during the previous two administrations. Now, this is the kind of growth that we want more of. We think we can do much better still. That’s why we’re pushing these income tax cuts for middle income families in the context of a balanced budget that protects important programs.
KEMP: Four years too late. You told us that four years ago. And we still don’t have it. How can we trust an administration that, all of a sudden, four years into or the last year of its four years tells us that now they’re going to follow through on the promise they made four years ago? This economy is not growing fast enough. The haves are doing well, but Jim the have-nots are not doing well. There’s people hurting, there’re families that can’t stay together. There’s jobs that are not being created, and the unemployment rate in our nations’ inner cities is somewhere between 16 and 25 percent. That is morally and socially unacceptable in a modern day economy.
LEHRER: Mr Vice President, Senator Dole raised the same question to President Clinton the other night about keeping promises made. What is your reaction to that? What is your response to that charge against you and the President.
GORE: President Bill Clinton promised to create 8 million jobs. He’s created 10 and a half million new jobs. He’s promised to cut the budget deficit in half. He has cut it by 60 percent. He promised to end welfare as we know it. He passed and signed the Welfare Reform Law. He has already moved 1.9 million people off the welfare rolls into good jobs. We’ve got a plan to move 1 million more off welfare during the next four years. He promised to implement the death penalty. We passed an anti-crime Bill that has 60 new death penalty provisions. He promised to pass a plan that would put 100,000 new police officers on the streets. It is law, over the opposition of Senator Dole, and 20,000 of them are already on the streets, 2,000 of them have been funded already for here in Florida. We’re ahead of schedule and we’re going to get the additional 80,000 new police officers on the streets in the coming four years, 45,000 of them are now already funded. That is a record of promises made and promises kept. He promised middle-income tax cuts. We’ve cut taxes for 15 million families and our plan to cut them for all middle income families has been waiting for action in the Congress for two full years. In the next four years, we will pass it.
KEMP: Well, to say that this is the best economy in 30 years just staggers the imagination. We have a growth rate of the last four years of about two and a half percent. My friend Al Gore says itâ€™s better than the Reagan years. It isn’t. But irrespective of whether he thinks it is or not means less than fact that this country cannot morally and socially and economically accept an economy running out the clock on the 20th Century. We’re treading water. We have families that are hurting. We have people who are unemployed. We have people with no property. We have an administration that is demolishing public housing in our inner cities and not providing anything else but more public housing. Their solution to the inner city is more — excuse the expression but it’s true, “socialism.” It is not for the people. It is for the government to tell them where to live, where to go to school. We need school choice. We need to privatize public housing, we need to sell it to the residents, we need to put enterprise zone into, in, America and need to lower the rates of taxation on labor, capital and the factors of production. That’ll happen under Bob Dole.
GORE: We are demolishing the outdated projects that did not work and we’re replacing them with new units that do work. And we have private vouchers so that individuals can choose for themselves where they live and we’re selling these units to many of those who want to buy them. Mr. Kemp had a good idea when he advocated that years ago. He talked about it, we did it, and we’re going to do a lot more of it, if we have the opportunity with the help of the American people.
LEHRER: Mr. Kemp, uh some are saying these days that something’s gone terribly wrong with the American soul, that we’ve become too mean, too selfish, too uncaring and the spitting incident, how it was handled, the baseball players used as a recent example. What do you think about that?
KEMP: Civility, responsibility, racial reconciliation, healing the wounds of our country has to be one of the greatest, most singularly important goals for this country here on the edge of the 21st Century. How in the name of American democracy can we say to eastern Europe that democratic capitalism will work there if we can’t make it work in East L.A. or East Harlem or East Palo Alto, California? How can we tell South Africa and the new Mandela government that democracy and private property and limited government and the rule of law and civility will work there if it’s not working in our own backyard here at home or the South Bronx? How can America go into the next century and leave so many people behind? “USA Today,” just few weeks ago did a study. They said the affluent are doing very well in America, the haves, the have-nots and the poor are being left behind. It is a giant, in my opinion, zero sum game. Kind of like musical chairs when we were young boys and girls growing up. And it seemed like when the music stopped the big guy elbowed out the little guy from that last chair. That’s not America folks. We need more chairs, we need a bigger table, we need a greater banquet. We need to create more wealth. We need to create more jobs and more access to credit and capital and educational choice and opportunity for any man or woman and child to be what God meant them to be, not what Washington, D.C. wants them to be.
GORE: I think Mr. Lehrer, that throughout much of his career, Jack Kemp has been a powerful and needed voice against the kind of coarseness and incivility that you refer to in the question. I think it’s an extremely valuable service to have a voice within the Republican party who says we ought to be one nation. We ought to cross all of the racial and ethnic and cultural barriers. I think that is a very important message to deliver. And we ought to speak out against these violations of civility when they do occur. You asked about the incident involving Roberto Alomar. I won’t hesitate to tell you what I think. I think he should have been severely disciplined, suspended perhaps, immediately. I don’t understand why that action was not taken, but the same could be said of so many incidents in all kinds of institutions in our society, but I compliment Mr. Kemp for the leadership he has shown in moving us away from that kind of attitude.
KEMP: Well, I thank you, Al. I mean that very, very sincerely, but I’m trying to make a bigger point. That civility cannot return to our country unless every person feels that they have an equal shot at the American dream. That if you’re born in this country to be a mezzo-soprano or a master carpenter or a school teacher, like my daughter, or a professional football quarterback, nothing should be in your way. And removing those barriers is what Bob Dole is all about, moving our country forward and leaving no one behind.
LEHRER: Mr. Vice President, do you agree with that thesis that in order to solve the problem of civility, the problems of the American soul, you have to — it’s an economic problem more than it is something else?
GORE: I think that economics is one of the single most important parts of this problem. That’s why we’re focusing on tax credits, to hire 1 million more people coming off welfare in the inner city. That’s why we’re focusing on an economic policy that has already created ten and a half million new jobs and is going to create millions more within the context, again, of a balanced budget that protects important programs. We have focused especially on the most distressed areas, because we cannot leave anyone behind. Our empowerment zones and enterprise communities, the tax credits that will encourage the formation of new businesses, the new approach by the small business administration to get more loans out to individuals that have not had equal access to capital in the past. These are parts of the plan. Another part of it is the community development financial institutions. And the — and the law that says deposits that are made in a community, in the inner cities say, should be kept in the community, not entirely, but some percentage of them should be kept there. That prevents that money being taken from the community and invested in some go-go investment on the other side of the world. And when they invest in the community, they find that there’s a better payback rate, more small businesses are created and the community improves. That’s happening in America today, not fast enough, but faster than before and we think we can accelerate it with our plan.
KEMP: There really is no separation between a strong community and a strong economy. And you can’t have a strong economy without strong communities and strong families. The word “economics” in Greek came from the word family, or law or custom of the family. A family without a job where both breadwinners are away from home and cannot spend time with their children or can’t send the child to the school of their choice rather than just the choice of the federal bureaucracy, cannot possibly be as strong as a family that has the nurture, the love, the dignity and the justice that goes along with one breadwinner, a strong job, and if that man or woman wants to work, it’s their choice, not just to pay taxes. So we need both. We need strong commun — we need strong schools, we need schools that nurture the type of discipline and respect from teachers and parents. And Bob Dole wants to empower the public school districts and the teachers, not the federal bureaucracy at the Department of Education.
GORE: Well, Senator Dole has said that he wants to abolish the Department of Education. He voted against the creation of Head Start. He vigorously opposed the Family and Medical Leave Act, which was the first law that President Clinton signed as president. Now, Senator Dole has suggested he would repeal the Family and Medical Leave Act if he had the chance if he was elected president. We believe in more educational opportunity and measures to strengthen families, not restrict their access to education.
LEHRER: Mr. Kemp, speaking of the family, where do you come down on it? Do you believe it should be repealed? The Family Leave Act?
KEMP: I wouldn’t have voted for it. It’s in place. Their answer, this administration to every single problem is another regulation and another tax. Clearly, in America, we need — I am astounded to think that you can have a strong Family Leave Act or policy by a business if they’re not making a profit. If there aren’t a lot of jobs, if there isn’t the types of policies that will enhance the formation of the seed corn and the oxygen and the capital that would allow that company not only retain that profit but invest it. As I said earlier, Dana Crist of Lancaster, Pennsylvania who runs a small little manufacturing or distribution center in Lancaster, said that she as an entrepreneur, would start a whole new factory if the federal government would cut the cost of capital. She wants the capital gains rate reduced. And if, to Al Gore and Bill Clinton that is somehow, trickle-down economics. Tell that to Dana Crist, tell it to Van Woods, tell it to the men and women I met in South Central. Tell it to anybody who understands how to makes democratic capitalism work. I want to say it one more time. The real excitement of a Dole/Kemp Administration would be to get out of this current tax code that redistributes wealth and create a brand new system for the 21st Century that’s pro-family, pro-growth and stops the double, triple and quadruple taxation of income from work, savings, investment and entrepreneurial risk taking in America.
GORE: The question as I recall, it was about Family and Medical Leave. Here’s how it works. If you have a child who is critically ill or has been seriously injured and you have to stay with that child in the hospital, some employers, have said you can’t take too much time off in spite of these circumstances. I personally know people who have been fired because they made the choice to be with their child. Don’t tell me this doesn’t happen. It happens all across the United States. But since Bill Clinton made this the first law he signed, it has been use 12 million times by American families to reconcile the demands of work with the responsibilities to the family. We now want to extend it to PTA meetings and scheduled doctors appointments. It shouldn’t be repealed. It ought to be extended. 75 percent of businesses who have been — had experience with it say they like it. It works.
KEMP: Well, it was here before Bill Clinton and it will be here after Bill Clinton. Senator Tsongas a good friend of Senator Gore, Vice President Gore suggested that he was afraid his party was falling into the trap of loving the employee, but hating the employer. You cannot love labor and hate employers. You cannot drive this wedge between workers and management. And businesses were providing family leave. They will continue. They should. They’ve got to make a profit and the tax on business, capital, labor and families is too high and it will — we want to reduce that regulatory burden and that tax burden in a new Dole/Kemp Administration.
LEHRER: Gentlemen, that was the last question, so now we go to the closing statements. There will be three minutes each and Mr. Kemp, you are first.
KEMP: Thank you, Jim and thanks to the people of St. Petersburg for a fantastic hospitality and my friend, Al Gore, for a vigorous debate. I think this is the most exciting time in the history of the world to be alive. We have lived through what Jean Kirpatrick called the bloodiest century in mankind’s history. We have defeated in this system of ours fascism, Nazism, communism, socialism is defunct or debunked around the world, the evil of apartheid has ended. There is only one last question remaining for the next century, indeed the next millennium. Can we, in America, make the world’s greatest liberal democracy, this democratic experiment in private property, limited government, the rule of law, respect for families and traditional Judeo-Christian values work, so it can be a blessing to our country and a blessing to the rest of the world? With all due respect to this administration, they’ve got a foreign policy in disarray. They have a lack of credibility around the world. Weakness, I said earlier, is provocative and clearly, this economy is not performing up to the standards that we would expect from this great nation going into the most exciting global economy the world has ever known. There’s something amiss. Our culture seems to be weakening all around us. Families are under tremendous pressure. People do not — do not feel safe in their homes. A mother doesn’t feel safe sending her child to school. Our schools are not educating. It’s not the problem of the teachers. They are overworked and my daughter will tell you, they are underpaid and we know that, they need to be empowered. We need to reform education. We need to reform welfare. We need to reform litigation and regulation. And we certainly need to reform this tax code that is a product of this terrible century of war and recession and inflations. It can be done. We need somebody who understands the potential of the American people, who are not just doing well for ourselves, we need to do well for the rest of the world, because they’re looking at us. And we need to make it work in every neighborhood and community in America and for every family, so that no one as Bob Dole said in his San Diego acceptance speech is left behind. Bob Dole, as I said earlier, is a man of courage, a man of principles, a man who crawled out of a fox hole on Riva Ridge in 1945 to save a wounded brethren. The bible says no greater love hath a man than he gave his life. Well, Bob Dole did, just about, he’d been through the valley of the shadow and he as Commander-in-Chief can take this country with the courage of Churchill. The principles of Lincoln and the indefatigable optimism and spirit that this nation expects from its Commander-in-Chief and the next President of the United States, Bob Dole.
LEHRER: Mr. Vice President?
GORE: Thank you very much, Mr. Lehrer. Thanks again to the people of St. Petersburg and thanks again to Jack Kemp. I have enormous respect for Jack Kemp and for Bob Dole. They’re good men. I don’t agree with their plan. I’ve tried to make that clear tonight. And one reason I’ve tried to make it clear is that in just 27 days, the United States of America has an important choice to make. Between two approaches to the future of this country. We have a plan that will create millions more jobs, bring the deficits down further and balance the budget, while protecting Medicare, protecting Medicaid, protecting and preserving the environment, our air, our water, the Everglades, the Tongas, the Mojave Desert in California, the Utah-Red Rocks area, all of which have been protected by President Bill Clinton. We also have a plan to expand access to education. There’s a family in the audience tonight, the McNeil family, who lives right here in St. Petersburg. Both parents are teachers, they’re not rich in money, but they have strong values and they value education. They’re oldest son is a freshman at St. Petersburg Junior High — Junior College. Their younger son, Roderick, is a sophomore in the same high school that Don McNeil teaches at. Roderick is concerned that he may not be able to get the tuition he needs to go to college when the time comes. Our plan gives a $1500 tax credit to make that junior college essentially free. And a $10,000 tax deduction to make it so that no American family, or almost no family, will have to pay taxes on the money they pay for college tuition. This plan also gives tax breaks on the sale of a home, up to $500,000 in profit tax free. It gives the new break for first-time home buyers, and, again, all in the context of a balanced budget. We have seen progress during the last four years because policies like these have been working. This risky scheme that I’ve described tonight has been said by many objective observers to not add up, it would be a serious risk. Our plan, by contrast, has been working and will work more. We want to build a bridge to the 21st Century and we want it to be strong enough and broad enough for all families to cross and we want it to lead to a brighter future for America, ’cause our best days are ahead.
LEHRER: Thank you.
(APPLAUSE)
October 16, 1996
The Second Clinton-Dole Presidential Debate
LEHRER: Good evening from the Shiley Theatre at the University of San Diego, San Diego, California. I’m Jim Lehrer of the News Hour on PBS. Welcome to this second 1996 presidential debate between Senator Bob Dole, the Republican nominee, and President Bill Clinton, the Democratic nominee. It is sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates. We will follow a town-hall type format tonight. The questions over the next 90 minutes will come from citizens of the greater San Diego area. They were chosen in the past week by the Gallup organization to represent a rough cross section of voters as to political views, age, gender and other factors. Each said he or she is undecided about this presidential race. They were told to come tonight with questions. Nobody from the debate commission or the two campaigns has any idea what those questions are. Neither do I. We will all be hearing them for the first time at the same time. I met with this group three hours ago, and we spoke only about how it was going to work tonight. They are sitting in five sections. I will call on individuals at random, moving from one section to another with each new question, alternating the questions between the two candidates. My job is to keep things fair and the subjects as clear and as varied as possible. The rules, drawn by the campaigns, are basically the same as they were for the Hartford and St. Petersburg debates; 90 second-answers, 60 -second rebuttals, 30-second responses for each question. The candidates are not allowed to question each other directly. There will be two-minute opening and closing statements. The order for this evening was set by coin toss. We begin now with Senator Dole and his opening statement. Senator Dole.
DOLE: Thank you very much, Jim. Let me first give you a sports update. The Braves, one; the Cardinals, nothing, early on. I want to thank you and I want to thank everybody here tonight. I want to give a special thanks to my wife Elizabeth, my daughter Robin for their love and support, and thank the people who are listening and watching all over America. In 20 days, you will help decide who will lead this country into the next century. It’s an awesome responsibility. And you must ask yourself, do you know enough about the candidates? You should know as much as possible about each of us. Sometimes the views have been distorted. There’s been millions and millions of dollars of negative advertising spent distorting my views. But I hope tonight you will get a better feel of who Bob Dole is and what he’s all about. And I think first you should — I should understand that the question on your mind is do I understand your problem. Would I understand it if it occurred to me, and I might just say I’m from a large family. I got lots of relatives and they’re good, average, middle-class, hardworking Americans. They live all across the country. They’re not all Republicans. Maybe all but one. But in any event, I understand the problems. Whether it’s two parents working because one has to pay the taxes and one has to provide for the family, whether it’s a single parent who just barely pays the pressing bills or whether you’re worried about an education for your children going to the best schools, or whether you’re worried about safe playgrounds, drug-free schools, crime-free schools. This is what this election is all about. And hopefully tonight when we conclude this debate you will have a better understanding and the viewing and listening audience will have a better understanding. Thank you.
LEHRER: Mr. President, two minutes, opening statement.
CLINTON: I was going to applaud, too. Well, thank you, Jim. And thanks to the people of San Diego for giving us this opportunity to have another discussion about the decision we all face in front of people who will make the decision. Again, I will say I will do my best to make this a discussion of ideas and issues, not insults. What really matters is what happens to your future and what happens to our country as we stand on the brink of a new century, a time of extraordinary possibility. I have a simple philosophy that I tried to follow for the last four years: Do what creates opportunity for all, what reinforces responsibility from all of us, and what will help us build a community where everybody’s got a role to play and a place at the table. Compared to four years ago, we’re clearly better off. We’ve got ten and a half million more jobs, the deficit’s been reduced by 60 percent. Incomes are rising for the first time in a decade, the crime rates, the welfare rolls are falling, we’re putting , 100,000 more police on the street. 60,000 felons, fugitives and stalkers have been denied handguns. But that progress is only the beginning. What we really should focus on tonight is what we still have to do to help the American people make the most of this future that’s out there. I think what really matters is what we can do to build strong families. Strong families need a strong economy. To me that means we have to go on and balance this budget while we protect Medicare and Medicaid and education and the environment. We should give a tax cut, targeted to child rearing and education, to buying a first home and paying for health care. We ought to help protect our kids from drugs and guns and gangs and tobacco. We ought to help move a million people from welfare to work and we ought to create the finest education system in the world where every 18-year-old can go on to college and all of our younger children have great educational opportunities. If we do those things, we can build that bridge to the 21st century. That’s what I hope to get to talk about tonight. Thank you.
LEHRER: Let’s go now to the first question from this section. For Senator Dole. Yes, ma’am. Yes.
MS. McAFEE: Hello, Senator Dole.
DOLE: Hi.
MS. McAFEE: My name is Shannon McAfee. I’m a beginning educator in this country, and I really think it’s important what children have to say. They’re still very idealistic. And they — everything they say comes from the heart. I have a quote for you from “If I Were President,” compiled by Peggy Gavin. A sixth grader says, “If I were president, I would think about Abraham Lincoln and George Washington and what they did to make our country great. We should unite the white and black people and people of all cultures. Democrats and Republicans should unite also. We should all come together and think of the best ways to solve the economic problems of our country. “I believe that when we are able to come together and stop fighting amongst ourselves we will get along a lot better.” These are the ideals and morals that we are teach — we are trying to teach our children in these days. Yet we don’t seem to be practicing them in our government, in anything. If you are president, how will you begin to practice what we are preaching to our children, the future of our nation?
DOLE: Well, I would say first of all, I think, it’s a very good question. I appreciate the quote from the young man. There’s no doubt about it that many American people have lost their faith in government. They see scandals almost on a daily basis. They see ethical problems in the Whitehouse today. They see 900 FBI files, private person, being gathered up by somebody in the Whitehouse. Nobody knows who hired this man. So there’s a great deal of cynicism out there. But I’ve always tried in whatever I’ve done is to bring people together. I said in my acceptance speech in San Diego about two months ago that the exits are clearly marked. If you think the Republican party is some place for you to come if you’re narrow minded or bigoted or don’t like certain people in America, the exits are clearly marked for you to walk out of as I stand here without compromise, because this is the party of Lincoln. I think we have a real obligation, obviously public officials. I’m no longer a public official. I left public life on June the 11th of this year. But it is very important. Young people are looking to us. They’re looking to us for leadership. They’re watching what we do, what we say, what we promise and what we finally deliver. And I would think, it seems to me that there are opportunities here. When I’m President of the United States, I will keep my word. My word is my bond.
LEHRER: Mr. President.
CLINTON: One of the reasons that I ran for president, Sandy, is because not just children, a lot of grownups felt that way. And if you remember four years ago, we had not only rising unemployment, but a lot of rising cynicism. I had never worked in Washington as an elected official. It seemed to me that most of the arguments were partisan, Republican, Democrat, left, right, liberal, conservative. That’s why I said tonight I’m for opportunity, responsibility and community. And we’ve gotten some real progress in the last four years. I’ve also done everything I could at every moment of division in this country, after Oklahoma City, when these churches were burned, to bring people together and remind people that we are stronger because of our diversity. We have to respect one another. You mentioned Washington and Lincoln. They were presidents at historic times. This is an historic time. It’s important we go beyond those old partisan arguments and focus on people and their future. When we do that, instead of shutting the government down over a partisan fight over the budget, we’re a better country and that’s why we’re making progress now.
LEHRER: Senator.
DOLE: Well, bringing people together, again, is obviously a responsibility we all have. I know you do it. Everybody here does it. You do a lot of things nobody knows about. I have a little foundation for the disabled called the Dole Foundation. We’ve raised about $10 million. We don’t talk about it. We try to help people with disabilities. Bring them back into the mainstream of public life. So it seems to me that there’s also a public trust. When you’re the president of the United States, you have a public trust and you have to keep that public trust, as George Washington, as Abraham Lincoln did. And I think now that trust is being violated and it seems to me we ought to face up to it, and the president ought to say tonight that he’s not going to pardon anybody that he was involved in business with who might implicate him later on.
LEHRER: All right. The next question from this section right here. Right there in the middle, sir. Yes, sir.
DR. BERKLEY: Dr. Robert N. Berkley. I’m a cardiologist from Fallbrook, California. Mr. President, I would like to know if you would please explain your plans for — in a substantive fashion for addressing the problems with the health care system in our country.
CLINTON: I will. First of all, let me say what we have done. In the last four years we’ve worked hard to promote more competition to bring down the rate of inflation in health care costs without eroding health care quality. The government pays for Medicare and Medicaid, as you know, and that’s very important. Secondly, we’ve added a million more children to the ranks of the insured through the Medicaid program. We have protected 25 million people through the passage of the Kennedy-Kassebaum bill that says you can use your health insurance if you change jobs or someone in your family has been sick. We just recently ended those drive-by deliveries saying people can’t be kicked out of the hospital by insurance companies when they’ve just had babies. So this is, that’s a good start. In the next four years, I want to focus on the following things. Number one, add another million children to the insured ranks through the Medicaid program. Number two, keep working with the states, as we are now, to add 2.2 million more people to the insurance system. Number three, cover people who are between jobs for up to six months. That could protect 3 million families, 700,000 kids. Number four, make sure we protect the integrity with the Medicare program and Medicaid program and not do anything in cutting costs which would cause hundreds of hospitals to close which could have been the case if the 270billion dollar Medicare cut that I vetoed, had been enacted in the law.
DOLE: Well, first, let me say there you go again, Mr. President, talking about a Medicare cut. I have heard you say this time after time. I have heard you say on one TV appearance, “the media made me do it.” You were trying to defend your cut which was not a cut either, Reduction in the growth of spending. We’ve always had at least 7 percent. You’ve said publicly that it’s now three times the rate of inflation. We ought to cut the growth to twice the rate of inflation. It’s about where we are now. So let’s stop talking about cutting Medicare. In my economic plan we increase it 39percent. Don’t forget what he tried to do with health care. 17 new taxes, spend 1.5 trillion dollars, 50 new bureaucracies. Can you believe that? You couldn’t even have been a cardiologist because he had quotas. You’re a cardiologist, it wouldn’t affect you. But if somebody wanted to be a cardiologist, ten years from now, you’d have to be certain you complied with some of the rules in this extreme medical plan the government was going to take over for all Americans. There are things we can do like the Kassebaum bill. We changed many provisions I authored, cover preexisting conditions, portability, and there are other things we can do. We still need to cover about 20million people and a lot of children.
CLINTON: I don’t have time in 30 seconds to respond to fix all that. But let me just say the American Hospital Association said that the budget I vetoed could have closed 700 hospitals. Not me. On a per-person basis, it did cut way below the rate of inflation in medical costs. But the important thing is what are we going to do now? We need to help people who are between jobs. We need to cover more kids. Provide more preventative care. My balanced budget covers mammograms for ladies, women on Medicare and also gives respite care to the million-plus families who have someone with Alzheimerâ€™s. These things are paid for in the balanced budget plan. It’ll move us forward.
LEHRER: Next question is for Senator Dole from here. Yes, sir.
MR. MILLIGAN: Senator Dole, my name is Jason Milligan, active duty military and small business owner, and my question is: What is your position on closing the gap between military and civilian pay scales?
DOLE: Jason, I appreciate that very much, being a former military man myself. You know, we have 17,000 men and women today wearing our uniform that receive food stamps. It shouldn’t happen in America. We have men and women wearing our uniform in substandard housing. It shouldn’t happen in America. And it’s time we take a look at the pay scales. Did get a 3 percent increase this year, but that’s not enough. If we’re going to ask young men and young women to protect us and defend us around the world, and we’ve had more deployments under this administration than any time in history. Fifty times we deployed troops around the world. Every time you do that you take a risk. Somebody, you know, maybe your son, maybe your grandson, maybe somebody else. But I think anybody who wears a uniform is a great American. Remember Vietnam? Remember when people almost used to walk across the street rather than have a contact with somebody who was in Vietnam? That’s all behind us now, and it should be behind us, and the forgotten war, the Korean War, but I guess I can just answer you very plainly, Jason. Thank you for doing what you’re doing. America owes you a debt of gratitude.
CLINTON: May I ask you a question? What service are you in?
MR. MILLIGAN: I’m in the United States Navy, sir.
CLINTON: And what kind of small business do you have?
MR. MILLIGAN: I have an Amway business.
CLINTON: Good for you. Let me say, if Senator Dole mentioned this, I just signed a bill that we got through Congress to increase the amount of pay increase we could give for military personnel and to make sure the pay increase this year was above the rate of inflation. I also presented to the Congress and they adopted a large package of quality-of-life improvements, which are very important. I spent a lot of time talking to military families as well as military members all over the world and in bases all across the United States, and I became convinced after talking to the families and the personnel in uniform that we needed to not only have the pay raise but we needed to invest more in child care, housing, and other things to support families, especially when there are longer deployments because of the downsizing of the military. So I, we’re going to do better, and we’ll do better still, but this is a commitment I think that all Americans share without regard to party.
DOLE: I don’t disagree with anything that the President said, except he waited four years to do these things, and my view is it ought to be, it will be done on Day 1. We’ll start working on Day 1 in the Dole- Kemp administration. This is important. We only have ten divisions now. We used to have 18. We had 25 fighter wings. We’re down to 13. We had 536 ships. We’re down to 336 ships. I mean, we’ve cut defense spending too much in the first place. The President told you in ’92 he would cut it 67 billion. He cut 112 billion dollars, so we’re right on the edge right now. But the last thing we ought to do is make those who wear the uniforms sacrifice.
LEHRER: Next question here for President Clinton. Yes, ma’am, here on the front row.
MS. KELLY: President Clinton, my name is Cecily Kelly. Yesterday, Yassir Arafat said in Palestine that he thinks the key to success in the Middle East is the commitment of Americans. Would you as President send American troops to Israel or the West Bank as peacekeepers?
CLINTON: Let me just take two seconds of my time because I’m the Commander-in-Chief to respond to one thing that was said. I propose to spend 1.6 trillion dollars on defense between now and the year 2002 and there’s less than 1 percent difference between my budget and the Republican budget on defense. Now, on the Middle East, as you know, I worked very hard for peace in the Middle East. The agreement between the Palestinians and the Israelis was signed at the White House and the agreement — the peace treaty with Jordan, I was — I went to Jordan to sign that — to be there. But — and I think the United States can do whatever we reasonably can. I can say this: I do not believe Yassir Arafat wants us to send troops to the West Bank. We have never been asked to send troops to the West Bank. I saw the agreement that Prime Minister Rabin and Yassir Arafat signed on the West Bank. It had 26 separate maps they had to sign, literally thousands of delineations of who would do what on the West Bank, and I believe if the parties will get together and in a good-faith manner make that agreement, that they’ll be able to do it if we cannot impose a peace on the Middle East. My position has always been that the job of the United States was to minimize the risks of peace. You know, if they asked me to be part of some monitoring force — as we are in the Sinai and have been since 1978 — to monitor the peace between Egypt and Israel, frankly, I would have to think about it. I would have to see what they wanted to do, but I don’t believe that will be the request. I think what Mr. Arafat wants us to do is to make sure that everybody honors the agreements they’ve already made. That’s why I brought the leaders to Washington a few days ago. I think they will, and I think we’ll get there. Don’t be too discouraged.
DOLE: Let me, Jason, come back to you a minute because there is a big difference in the defense budget. We had 7 billion this year and 10 billion more than the president. He puts his money in the outyears, and even if he were re-elected, he’d be gone before anything would happen, and nothing is going to happen. We don’t have modernization now. If we don’t build more B-2 bombers in California and we lost about 500,000 jobs out in California, because of this devastation, these big, big cuts. We had to make cuts. We didn’t have the cuts the president promised he’d make and then he doubled. I think we need to go back and take a look. We’re increasing defense reasonably — not too much, but we are increasing defense some — because we want to be prepared in case somebody here gets called up, Jason. I would say I didn’t hear what Yassir Arafat had to say, but I don’t want to — you know, I think foreign policy, I want to be very careful about, and I’m not here to argue about the President with some ongoing foreign policy matter. What I want the President to do, and I think he may have done it, his last statement, call for an unconditional end of the violence and have the parties keep on talking as they should talk and have a resolution. The last thing we want to do is commit more forces anywhere. But let’s sort of keep this out of politics because it’s pretty dicey right now.
CLINTON: When the change of government occurred in Israel, the people of Israel were saying we don’t want to abandon the peace process. We want more security. Then a lot of mutual distrust developed. A lot of things happened which maybe shouldn’t have happened. When I asked Yassir Arafat and Prime Minister Netanyahu to come to Washington and got them together and they talked alone for three hours, I was convinced that they had to have a chance to make that peace. Again, I’d say if they asked us to play some reasonable role, I don’t know how I would respond. It would depend entirely on what they asked us to do, but the real secret there is for them to abide by the agreements they’ve made and find a way to trust each other, and they’re going to have to spend some time and trust each other. Prime Minister Rabin gave his life believing that that trust could be materialized, and I still think it can be.
LEHRER: Alright, next question from this section and it is for Senator Dole. Back in the back. Yes, sir, right there. Yes sir.
MR. DELGADO: Senator Dole, Oscar Delgado.
LEHRER: Oscar.
MR. DELGADO: Exsmoker for 30 years. About 30 years ago I was a pack-plus a day man. Okay? You mentioned a statement — you said some time ago that you didn’t think nicotine was addictive. Would you care to — are you still holding to that statement, or do you wish to recant or explain yourself?
DOLE: Oh, that’s very easy. My record going back to 1965 in the Congress, the first vote we had was whether or not you should put a little notice on cigarettes. They may be danger — I voted I for everything since that time. In fact, 1992 we had a bill come before us that all the states had to comply or they’re going to lose certain money. We sent it to the Clinton Administration for implementation, and they waited three and a half years. And during that period about 3,000 young kids every day started smoking. So you add it up. That’s about three million. Not until again in 1996 — I don’t want anybody to smoke. My brother probably died partly because of cigarettes. I was asked a technical question. Are they addictive? Maybe they — they probably are addictive. I don’t know. I’m not a doctor. You shouldn’t smoke. You ought to be glad you quit, Oscar, 30 years. And it seems to me what we need to do is to talk about not only tobacco but drugs, because drug use between 12- and 17-year-olds has doubled in this administration in the last 44 months. Marijuana use is up 141percent. Cocaine use up 160 percent. They’re your kids. It’s all happening in this administration because they cut funding and they cut interdiction. When I’m President of the United States, we’re going to use the National Guard and whatever sources we need to stop some of the drugs coming into America. If you stop the drugs, nobody is going to use the drugs; so don’t smoke, don’t drink, don’t use drugs. Just don’t do it.
CLINTON: Oscar, the question of what the federal government should do to limit the access of tobacco to young people is one of the biggest differences between Senator Dole and me. We did propose a regulation six months after I became President under the law he mentioned. It simply says all these states — it made it illegal for kids to smoke. Now they have to try harder if they want to keep getting federal funds. Then we took comments, as we always do, and there were tens of thousands of comments as to how we ought to do it. That’s what drug it out. Meanwhile, we started the — also in ’93 to look into whether cigarettes were addictive enough for the Federal Food and Drug Administration to ban the ability of cigarette companies to advertise, market and distribute their products to our kids. No president had ever taken on the tobacco lobby before. I did. Senator Dole opposed me. He went down and made a speech to people who were on his side saying that I did the wrong thing. I think I did the right thing. On drugs, I have repeatedly said drugs are wrong and illegal and can kill you. We have strengthened enforcement, and everybody in San Diego knows we strengthened control of the border. We have done a lot more, and I hope we get a chance to talk about it.
DOLE: Well, they also know if they live in San Diego, Mr. President, if you’re caught with 125 pounds of marijuana or less, you go back to Mexico. You’re not prosecuted. You have a U.S. attorney here that sends `em back home, so I think that’s pretty important. That’s a lot of marijuana. That’s a big supply. But don’t get into this smoke screen here Oscar. The President in the election year decided I ought to do something, I haven’t done anything on drugs. I’ve been AWOL for 44 months, so let’s take on smoking, see they haven’t even done it. They haven’t said what’s going to happen, whether they’re going to have it declared addictive. Once it’s a drug, does it apply only to teenagers or everybody in America? Nobody should smoke, young or old, but particularly young people should not smoke, but my record is there. It’s been there. I’ve voted eight, ten times since 1965.
LEHRER: Next question is for President Clinton. It comes from right here. Yes, sir.
MR. FLECK: President Clinton, my name is Jack Fleck. I’m retired Air Force pilot. Sir, it’s officially forecast that our annual Medicare and Social Security deficits are measured in the trillions of dollars next century. Depending on who you listen to, Social Security will be bankrupted in either 2025 or 2030. I feel this is grossly unfair, especially to our younger generation who are losing faith in the system. My question is this: Assuming you agree that our entitlement programs are on an unsustainable course, what specific reforms do you propose?
CLINTON: First of all, there are two different things. Social Security and Medicare are entirely different in terms of the financial stabilities. Let’s talk about them separately. Social Security is stable until, as you pointed out, at least the third decade of the next century. But we’d like to have a Social Security fund that has about 70 years of life instead of about 30 years of life. What we have to do is simply to make some adjustments to take account of the fact that the baby boomers, people like me, are bigger in number than the people that went just before us and the people that come just after us. And I think what we’ll plainly do is what we did in 1983 when Senator Dole served, and this is something I think he did a good job on when he served on the Social Security commission and they made some modest changes in Social Security to make sure that it would be alive and well into the 21st century. And we will do that. It’s obvious that there are certain things that have to be done and there are 50 or 60 different options, and a bipartisan commission to take it out of politics, will make recommendations and build support for the people. Medicare is different. Medicare needs help now. I have proposed a budget which would put ten years on the life of the Medicare trust fund. That’s more than it’s had a lot of the time in the last years. It would save a lot of money through more managed care, by giving more options, more preventative care and lowering the inflation rate and the prices we’re paying providers without having the kind of big premium increases and out-of-pocket costs that the budget I vetoed would provide. Then that would give us ten years to do with Medicare what we’re going to do with Social Security; have a bipartisan group look at what we have to do to save it when the baby boomers retire. But now we can, we ought to pass this budget now and put ten years on it right away so no one has to worry about it.
DOLE: Well again, if you’re somebody thinking about the future, I think it’s fair to say that it’ll be — we’ll work it out. This is a political year, and the President is playing politics with Medicare. After this year is over, we’ll resolve it just as we did with Social Security in `83. It’s a nonpartisan commission. Ronald Reagan got together with Tip O’Neill and Howard Baker, two Republicans and one Democrat. They appointed a commission I was on that commission. We resolved, we rescued Social Security. We suggested — I think it has been over a year ago now — we do the same with Medicare, and the White House called it a gimmick. Now last week I guess it was Donna Shalala said well we’ll cut Medicare a hundred billion and appoint a commission. It will probably have to be done by a commission. Take it out of politics. I think if I were a senior citizen I would be a little fed up with all these ads scaring seniors, scaring veterans and scaring students about education. When you don’t have any ideas, you don’t have any agenda, and all you have is fear, that’s all you can use. We have ideas in the Dole-Kemp campaign and we will rescue Medicare as we did Social Security.
CLINTON: Their idea was to have the poorest seniors in the country pay $270 more this year. Their idea was a budget that the that the American Hospital Association said could close 700 hospitals. Their idea was to charge everybody more out-of-pocket costs in their budget that I vetoed. Not in an election year, sir. I told them in early ’95. Senator Dole said 30 years ago he was one of 12 people who voted against Medicare and he was proud of it. A year ago he said, “I was right then. I knew it wouldn’t work.” American seniors have the highest life expectancy in the world. We need to reform it. Not wreck it.
LEHRER: Next question from here for Senator Dole. Yes, ma’am. Right here. Yes.
MS. GONZALEZ: Senator Dole my name is Susan Gonzalez. And I would like to know what you are — what would be your first step in reforming welfare?
DOLE: Well, we’ve taken the first step. Took it three steps, twice we sent welfare reform to the president and he vetoed it. On the third time we sent welfare reform to the president he signed it but announced he would change it next year, and the vice president said they were going to do something else through the line item veto which I’ve never understood, but that’s sort of inside baseball. What we need to do is make certain we try to return people to work. And I’m standing here as someone who, a long time ago as the county attorney in Russell, Kansas, one of our jobs every month was go through all the welfare checks and sign them. And three of those checks were my grandparents’. So I know what it’s like to have to look welfare head-on. Obviously some people are going to need help. This is the United States of America. You’re not going to go without food and you’re not going to go without medical care. This is America. But at the same time, if you want to get off Medicare, get back in the mainstream, we’re going to provide jobs. We’re going to say you have a five-year limit. You can be on welfare. You got two years to look for a job. We provided more money for daycare in the bill that passed the senate, was vetoed, then it came back and the president signed pretty much the same bill. But this is an important issue. I don’t think we ought to be giving welfare payments to illegal immigrants. It puts a heavy burden on a state like — except for emergencies. It puts a heavy burden on a states like California. It costs California taxpayers 3 billion dollars a year.
LEHRER: President Clinton.
DOLE: Let me get out of your way here.
CLINTON: It’s illegal right now and has been for years for illegal immigrants to get welfare benefits. Let me say that this is one of the most important issues in the world to me. I started working on welfare reform in 1980 because I was sick of seeing people trapped in a system that was increasingly isolating them and making their kids more vulnerable to get in trouble. So I’ve been working on it when I was a governor for a long time. When I became president I used the authority I had in this law to get out from certain federal rules to help states move people to work. We reduced the welfare rolls by 2 million already. Now, I’ve got a plan with this new welfare reform law to work with the private sector, to give employees specific tax incentives to hire people off welfare, and to do some other things which will create more jobs in the private sector, at least a million, and move more people from welfare to work. It’s very important. And I hope we get a chance to talk about this more. There’s not a more important issue. I, I still remember a woman that I met ten years ago who said she wanted to get off welfare so her kids could tell, give an answer when they say, “What does your mother do for a job?” I met that woman again. She’s got four kids. One’s got a good job, one’s studying to be a doctor. One’s in technical school, one’s an honor student in high school. I want to make more people like that woman, Lily Harden, so I’ve got a plan to do it, and it’s just beginning.
DOLE: Well another thing we can do. We talk about growth. We’ve got a great economic package which I hope we will discuss later. Across-the-board tax cut. Child credits. $500 per child under 18. Reduce the capital gains rate. Create more jobs and opportunities for people on and off welfare. We have other provisions. Less litigation. The trial lawyers, big supporters of the president. The trial lawyers, of course they like lawsuits, so every time they have a bill that they want vetoed, the president vetoes it for them. We’ve got to understand in America that we’ve got to have growth, create more jobs and more opportunities in the private sector. The president takes credit for all these people off welfare. The governors did that. Federal government doesn’t do that. And the government doesn’t create jobs. They’re created in the private sector.
LEHRER: This section, question? Yes ma’am. On the back row. This is for the president.
MS. JOHNSON: Mr. President. My name is Pamela Johnson and I’m a landlord. My question is, does your party have any future plans to reduce the capital gains tax, especially for retired Americans?
CLINTON: First of all, we have a big plan to reduce the capital gains tax when people sell their homes. Part of my tax package which is paid for in my balanced budget plan would exempt up to half a million dollars in gains from people when they sell their homes, which I think is the biggest capital gains benefit we could give to most ordinary Americans. We also have capital gains now for people that invest in new small businesses and hold the investment for five years. It was part of our other economic plan. And these are things I think that will go a long way toward helping America build a stronger economy and a better tax system. I think the most important thing to emphasize, though, is that we also have to help people in other ways to build a strong economy and we can’t have any tax cut that’s not paid for. One of the big differences between Senator Dole and myself is that I told you how I’m going to pay for every penny of the tax cuts I recommend and we’ve worked hard to bring this deficit down and that’s helped people in the real estate business because the interest rates are lower. We’ve got home ownership at a 15-year high. We’ve got this country going in the right direction. So we can have a tax cut but my priority would be to help the families who need it with child rearing and education and buying a first-time home and helping for health care costs. So from your business, helping in buying a first-time home, exempting the capital gains on the sale of the home would be the most important things that you asked about. Thank you, Pamela.
LEHRER: Senator Dole.
DOLE: Pam, what the president didn’t tell you is all his tax cuts expire the year 2000, but these increases go on forever. That’s the liberal approach. You know, give you a little tax cut, give you a couple of years, then make the tax increases go on forever. So the net tax increase in his plan’s somewhere between 60 and 80 billion dollars. We have in the Dole-Kemp economic plan, unless unless your home’s worth over 500,000 dollars. And if it is, I appreciate it congratulate you. But in any event, no tax. It’s a good idea, they saw it, they picked it up and put it in theirs, but it’s only temporary. Ours are permanent, ours is a good plan. Create jobs and opportunities. Capital gains rate, cut it in half, cut it 28 percent to 14 percent. There are 7 trillion dollars in assets locked up in America. If we cut the capital gains rate, I’m told everyday, I had a letter from a former constituent in Kansas saying I want to sell property in California, put it in my business in Kansas, I can’t, because the capital gains rate’s too high. We need to get the economy going. That’ll help social security. That’ll create more jobs. That’ll help people who want to get off welfare. It’s the American way.
CLINTON: Before Senator Dole left the Senate, he and Mr. Gingrich also were recommending that we pass these tax cuts only insofar as we could pay for them. We all assume that the tax cuts will be permanent. But we have to prove we can pay for them. After he left the senate, we abandoned that. That’s why most experts say that this tax scheme will blow a huge hole in the deficit, raise interest rates and weaken the economy and that will take away all the benefits of the tax cut with a weaker economy. That’s why we have to balance the budget, and I will tell you how I’m going to pay for anything I promise you, line by line. You should expect that from both of us.
LEHRER: All right. The next question is for Senator Dole. Yes, ma’am. Right there.
MS. NAUDIN: My name is Melissa Naudin. I’m a third-year student at UC, San Diego. I just want to say it’s a great honor representing the voices of America. My voice, my question is concerning you, Mr. Dole. All the controversy regarding your age. How do you feel you can respond to young voices of America today and tomorrow?
DOLE: Well, I think age is very — you know, wisdom comes from age, experience and intelligence. And if you have some of each — and I have some age, some experience and some intelligence — that adds up to wisdom. I think it also is a strength. It’s an advantage. And I have a lot of young people work in my office, work in my campaign. This is about America. This is about, somebody said earlier, one of the first questions, we’re together. It’s one America, one nation. I’m looking at our economic plan because I’m concerned about the future for young people. I’m looking about drugs. The president has been AWOL for four years. I’m looking about crime. He’ll claim credit now for crime going down, but it happens because mayors and governors and others have brought crime down. Rudy Giuliani, Mayor of New York, brought crime down 25 percent just in New York City. Of course the president will take credit for that. My view is we want to find jobs and opportunities and education. This year the Republican Congress, as far as student loans went from 24 billion to 36 billion over the next six years. A 50 percent increase. The highest appropriation. 6 billion dollars for Pell Grants, very, very important. We also raised the amount of each Pell Grant. In our economic plan, the $500 child credit can be used for young people, rolled over and over and over, you, of course not this age, but if you have a child two years old, 7 percent interest would be worth about $18,000 by the time that child was ready for college.
CLINTON: I can only tell you that I don’t think Senator Dole is too old to be president. It’s the age of his ideas that I question. You’re almost not old enough to remember this. But we tried this before, promising people an election year tax cut that’s not paid for.
DOLE: You tried it last time you ran.
CLINTON: Tell him you can have everything you got. And so let me just say this. Did you hear him say that Congress just voted to increase student loans and scholarships? They did after he left. The last budget he led cut Pell Grants, cut student loans. I vetoed it when they shut the government down. My plan would give students a dollar-for-dollar reduction for the cost of a typical community college tuition. A $10,000 deduction a year for the cost of college tuition. We let families save in an IRA, withdraw tax free to pay for the cost of education and it’s all paid for. My whole administration is about your future. It’s about what the 21st century is going to be like for you. I hope you will look at the ideas in it. Thank you.
DOLE: When you don’t have any ideas, I guess you say the other person’s ideas are old. As I said earlier, they don’t have any ideas. Their ideas is to raise taxes and spend more money. That’s the liberal philosophy. That’s what you like, you’ve got a perfect candidate. President Clinton came to California in 1992. He said the centerpiece in my first four years is going to be a middle class tax cut. Now all you got that tax cut, congratulations. Because you got a big tax increase. You got a 265 billion dollar tax increase. And he stands here and says politicians who make promises like that ought to be ignored. Well he made the promise. I keep my word, and you will have a tax cut. It will help you in whatever you’re going to do in the next few years. Thank you.
LEHRER: Next question is for President Clinton and it’s from — yes, ma’am. Yes.
MS. SANDERS: Hello. My name is Tressia Sanders. And my question is, do you feel that America has grown enough and has educated itself enough to totally cut out Affirmative Action?
CLINTON: No, ma’am, I don’t. I am against quotas. I’m against giving anybody any kind of preference for something they’re not qualified for. But because I still believe that there is some discrimination and that not everybody has an opportunity to prove they’re qualified, I favor the right kind of Affirmative Action. I’ve done more to eliminate Affirmative Action programs I didn’t think were fair and tighten others up than my predecessors have, since affirmative action’s been around. But I have also worked hard to give people a chance to prove that they are qualified. Let me just give you some examples. We’ve doubled the number of loans from the small business administration, tripled the number of loans to women business people, no one unqualified, everybody had to meet the standards. We’ve opened 260,000 new jobs in the military to women since I’ve been president. But the joint chiefs say we’re stronger and more confident and solid than ever. Let me give you another example of what I mean. To me, Affirmative Action is making that extra effort. It’s sort of like what Senator Dole did when he sponsored the Americans with Disabilities Act and said to certain stores, okay, you have to make it accessible to people in wheelchairs. We weren’t guaranteeing anything, anybody anything except the chance to prove they were qualified, the chance to prove that they could do it. And that’s why I must say I agree with General Colin Powell that we’re not there yet. We ought to keep making those extra effort Affirmative Action programs, the law and the policy of the land.
LEHRER: Senator Dole.
DOLE: Well, we may not be there yet but we’re not going to get there by giving preferences and quotas. I supported that route for some time and again I think it gets back to experience. A little experience, a little age, a little intelligence. And I noted that nobody was really benefitting except a very small group at the top. The average person wasn’t benefitting. People who had the money were benefiting. People who got all the jobs were benefiting. It seems to me that we ought to support the California civil rights initiative. It ought to be not based on gender or ethnicity or color. Or disability. I’m disabled. I shouldn’t have a preference. I would like to have one in this race, come to think of it, but I don’t get one. Maybe we can work that out. I get a 10-point spot. This is America. No discrimination. Discrimination ought to be punished but there ought to be equal opportunity. We ought to reach out, make certain everybody has a chance to participate. Equal opportunity. But we cannot guarantee equal results in America. That’s not how America became the greatest country on the face of the earth.
CLINTON: I have never supported quotas. I’ve always been against them. I don’t favor equal results, but I do favor making sure everybody has a chance to prove they’re competent. The reason I have opposed that initiative is because I’m afraid it will end those extra effort programs. Again I say, think of the Americans with Disabilities Act. Make an effort to put a ramp up there so someone in a wheelchair can get up. You don’t guarantee they get the job. You guarantee they have a chance to prove they’re competent. And as I said, this is not a partisan thing with me. General Colin Powell said the same thing, he fears the initiative would take away the extra effort programs. No preferences to unqualified people, no quotas, but don’t give up on making an extra effort until you’re sure everybody has a chance to prove they’re qualified.
LEHRER: All right. The next question is for Senator Dole and it comes from this section right here. The back row there in the blue shirt Yes sir..
MR. DAVID: My name’s Tim David. I’m a mechanical engineer. Senator Dole, how do you reduce taxes and balance the budget?
DOLE: Well I’m glad you asked. What’s your first name?
MR. DAVID: Tim.
DOLE: I first want to say the President didn’t quite give you all of the stuff on the quotas, because the Justice Department had what we called the Piscataway case up in New Jersey. It’s pretty clear that was a quota case, and just because one teacher was white and one black and they had the same qualifications, you know they decided who would stay there. It shouldn’t be that way. Now, the President can say well he wants to mend it, not end it. There are 168 federal programs that allow quotas. He ended one. Now, this economic package, Tim, I’m glad you asked, because you look like the type that might be able to benefit from a 15 percent across- the-board tax cut and $500-per-child tax credit, or — you know, estate tax relief which you’re not interested in right now, but capital gains rate reduction. If you’re taking care of an elderly parent, you get a $1,000 deduction. We think that’s very important because a lot of people take care of their parents. How do we pay for it? You can have a constitutional amendment to balance the budget, which the President opposed and defeated. He twisted arms and got six Democrats to vote with him and lost by one vote. We’re going to balance the budget, by the year 2002. The President wants to spend 20 percent more in the next six years, and I want to spend 14 percent more and give that 6 percent back to the people. Remember, it’s your money; it’s not his money. And it’s not my money. It’s your money. And you shouldn’t have to apologize for wanting to keep all you can of it. But he ought to apologize for wanting to take more and more. He wants to give you sort of a government tax cut, which really doesn’t mean anything.
CLINTON: You know, one of the responsibilities of growing older, it seems to me, is being able to tell people something they may not want to hear just because it’s true. When they had a 250 billion dollar tax scheme, that is half the size of this one. This one is 550. They passed the budget. They have 270 billion dollars in Medicare cuts the first education cuts in history, cut environmental enforcement by 25 percent, took away the guarantee of quality standards in nursing homes, took away the guarantee of health care for folks with disabilities. Don’t take my word for this. The Economist magazine polled lots of economists, seven Nobel prize winners who said if this tax scheme passes, it will require huge cuts, 40 percent, in the environment and law enforcement and education. It will require bigger cuts in Medicare than I vetoed last time. My targeted tax cut is for child-rearing, buying a first-time home, paying for health care costs. And it’s paid for, and I’ll tell you how I’ll pay for it. He won’t tell you because he can’t.
DOLE: Your targeted tax cut, Mr. President, never hits anybody. That’s the problem with it. Nobody ever gets it. But I must say I’m a little offended by this word “scheme.” You talked about it last time, you talked about a risky scheme and Vice President Gore repeated it about ten times in St. Petersburg. If I have anything in politics, it’s my word. My colleagues, Democrats and Republicans, will tell you that Bob Dole kept his word. I’m going to keep my word to you. I’m going to keep my word to the American people. We’re going to tax — cut taxes and balance the budget. We’re not going to touch Medicare. It’s going to grow 39 percent, and Social Security is going to grow 34 percent. The President doesn’t have any ideas so he’s out trashing ours. This isn’t going to blow a hole in the deficit. He promised you a tax cut in 1992, and if you got one, you ought to vote for him.
LEHRER: The next question is for the President. Yes sir right there.
MR. BURNS: My name is Duane Burns. I’m a martial arts instructor and a father. Mr. President, could you outline any plans you have to expand the Family Leave Act?
CLINTON: Thank you, well, first let me say that I signed the Family Leave Act. It was my very first bill, and I’m very proud of it because it symbolizes what I think we ought to be doing. I don’t take credit for all the good things that have happened in America, but I take credit for what I’ve tried to do to work with others to make good things happen. Most important good things that happen in America happen in families. Just about every family I know, the main concern is how am I going to succeed at work and still do right by my children. Family medical leave has let 12 million families take a little time off for the birth of a child or a family illness without losing their job. I’d like to see it expanded in two ways. I’d like to say you can also take a little time off without losing your job to go to a regular parent-teacher conference or to go to a regular doctor’s appointment with a family member. I’d also like to see the overtime laws change so that we could have some more flex time so that at the discretion of the worker, the worker, if you earn overtime, you could decide when you want that time to be taken, in cash or in time with your family if you’ve got a family problem. I never go anywhere, it seems like, where I don’t meet somebody who has benefited from a Family Leave Law. In Longview, Texas the other day, I met a woman who was almost in tears because she had been able to keep her job while spending time with her husband who had cancer. One of the people who’s here with me today met a woman in the airport saying her son, Jess was able to be present at the birth of her child because of the Family Leave Law. So yes, I think it should be expanded. We have to help people succeed at home and at work.
DOLE: Well, 88 percent of the people — the President claims 11 million are already covered and only 5 percent — keep in mind only 5 percent of the employers are affected by the Family Leave Act. We had a better idea. We didn’t win. We had a better idea. Now we have a majority and we get a president. That was a tax credit for the employer. Instead of the federal government, we had that tax credit, pick up some of the costs, because if you have to hire a replacement worker, that’s a cost. This is the way it ought to work, give more power back to the states and back to the people back to the taxpayers, not always the long arm of the federal government. But keep in mind this bill covers 5 percent of the employers, and 95 percent of the employers and all those employees they employ are not covered in this act. And according to Investors Daily, which I read just a couple of days ago, 88 percent of the people he claims credit for are already covered in collective bargaining agreements or other agreements. We had family leave in our office, I’m certain. I see my friend Senator Mitchell. He had family leave. I work every day with people. I spend a lot of time in hospitals. I know what it’s like to be in a hospital. Sure we want family leave. But there’s a better way to do it.
CLINTON: I only have 30 seconds. I can’t fix the statistics. It covers the majority of the work force. Employers of under 50 are exempted. The bill originally covered employers of 25 and more, but because of opposition, we went up to 50. Senator Dole led the opposition to it. He filibustered it. He said it was a mistake. He said it would hurt the economy. We’ve had record numbers of new small businesses and 10 and a half million jobs. It didn’t hurt the economy. He still believes it’s a mistake. I believe it’s right. You can decide which of us you think are right. It’s up to you.
LEHRER: Next question for Senator Dole. Yes, ma’am.
MS. GIANNOTTI: Hi. My name is Bridget Giannotti, and I’m a wife and mother of two sons, from Carlsbad. And my question to you, Senator Dole, is as the wife of a San Diego business owner, I see one of our biggest problems in the U.S. is it does not manufacture enough of our own products. How would you help this problem out?
DOLE: Well, right. We’ve lost 357,000 manufacturing jobs. The Bureau of Labor Statistics today said they made a mistake. It’s probably going to take a much, much higher figure. So we talk about all these new jobs. We’d better wait and see what the results are. We’re going to do that with a more aggressive trade policy. We’re going to do that with an economic package. We’re going to do that with regulatory reform. You know, regulations cost the average family right here, Democrat or Republican, about $7,000 a year. 7,000. That’s like a tax. It’s put a lot of people out of business. I met a lady in Colorado Springs about seven weeks ago now. She had a small business with 63 employees. She finally gave it up. Why? Because of paperwork and regulation. Congress passed a paperwork reduction act. The President exempts the IRS which creates three-fourths of the paperwork. We’re going to have regulatory — we’re gonna have litigation reform. You know, I fell off a platform out in California, Chico, a while back. Before I hit the ground, my cell phone rang and this trial lawyer said, I think we’ve got a case here. (Laughter). We’ve got to stop some of these frivolous lawsuits. They’re putting people out of business, men and women. Get the economy going, cut the capital gains rate, create more jobs and opportunities for everybody in America. That’s what we will do. And my word is good. I keep my promises. I don’t break my promises after the election, and I don’t make new promises in an election year. We’re going to get it done. We’re going to grow some of these jobs in America, because we need to get it — they’re going the wrong way.
CLINTON: Let’s look at the facts. We lost a lot of manufacturing jobs in the 12 years before I became President. We’ve gained manufacturing jobs since I’ve been President. We’ve negotiated over 200 separate trade agreements. Let’s just take California. In California, we made 37 billion dollars’ worth of telecommunications equipment eligible for export for the first time. We’re selling everything from from — from telephones to CDs to rice in Japan. We’re selling American automobiles in Japan now. I visited a Chrysler dealership in Japan. We’re No.1 in automobile manufacturing production and sales around the world again, the first time since 1970s. Why? Because we’ve had tough aggressive trade policies, and because we’ve got interest rates down. We have a good, stable economic policy. Because we reduced the deficit four years in a row. For the first time in the 20th century the President has done that in all four years and that’s why I don’t want to see us blow a big hole in the deficit with a tax program we can’t pay for, so your interest rates will go up, and you’ll have to pay back in higher interest rates what you allegedly will get in a tax cut, so I say keep working on expanding the markets. More than half of these 10 and a half million new jobs are in higher wage areas and we’ll have more manufacturing and sales around the world.
DOLE: You may think the biggest employer in America is General Motors, but I’ve got news for you. It’s Manpower Services. Hiring people temporarily who have lost their jobs and they get to work for 30 days or 60 days. That’s a good economy? I don’t think so. They’re setting new records this year. We had the worst economy in a century. We had the slowest growth, about 2.5 percent. The president inherited growth of over 5 percent. We don’t have the S&L crisis anymore. Republicans have cut 53 billion dollars in spending, that’s why the budget looked good. It didn’t look good the first two years when we had a Democratic president and Â Democratic Congress.
LEHRER: Next question is for President Clinton. Yes, sir.
MR. GOLDFARB: I’m Bob Goldfarb. I’m a travel agent and can you please explain your policy on the Employment Nondiscrimination Act that would have prohibited discrimination, would have prohibited people from being fired from their jobs simply for being gay or lesbian.
CLINTON: I’m for it. That’s my policy. I’m for it. I believe that any law- abiding, tax-paying citizen who shows up in the morning and doesn’t break the law and doesn’t interfere with his or her neighbors ought to have the ability to work in our country and shouldn’t be subject to unfair discrimination. I’m for it. Now, I have a little time left so let me just say that I get attacked so many times on these questions; it’s hard to answer these things. Senator Dole just said we had the worst economy in the century. In February he said we had the best economy in Â 30 years, just February. And I don’t want to respond in kind to all these things. I could. I could answer a lot of these things tit for tat. But I hope we can talk about what we’re going to do in the future. No attack ever created a job or educated a child, or helped a family make ends meet. No insult ever cleaned up a toxic waste dump or helped an elderly person. Now, for four years that’s what I worked on. If you give me four years more I will work on it some more and I will try to answer these charges, but I prefer to emphasize direct answers to the future and I gave you a direct answer.
LEHRER: Senator Dole.
DOLE: Well, I’m opposed to discrimination in any form but I don’t favor creating special rights for any group. That would be my answer to this question. And I’m, you know — there would be special rights for different groups in America. But I’m totally opposed to discrimination. I don’t have any policy against hiring anyone; whether it’s lifestyle or whatever, we don’t have any policy of that kind, never have had in my office or will we have in the future. But as far as special rights, I’m opposed to same-sex marriages, which the President signed well after midnight one morning in the dark of night. I opposed it. But I will get back to the economic package because, again, I think this is very important. If there’s anything that’s going to change America it’s get the economy growing. The President inherited a good economy, sure the S&L crisis then were selling assets. Got a Republican Congress cutting spending finally and he said it’s the best four years ever. That’s not true. We had a 1.2 million bankruptcy, set a new record. Credit card debt has never been higher. I just told you about this manufacturing job loss which is going to increase. We need a good strong economic package, let the private sector creates the jobs and they can do it.
CLINTON: If you believe that the California economy was better in 1992 than it is today, you should vote for Bob Dole. I have worked so hard out here to help turn this economy around. Let me just give you one tiny example. In San Diego where we had some defense cutbacks, we funded a project for the University of California San Diego to use airplane composite materials to build lighter, stronger bridges, a little project in a program that Senator Dole opposed. And that composite now is going to be built around the bridges on the Santa Monica Freeway to help minimize the impact of earthquakes and create more jobs. That’s just one tiny example. Maybe we will talk about some more before it’s over.
LEHRER: Next question’s for Senator Dole this section. Yes, ma’am. Yes.
MS. STRATEGOS: Senator Dole, I am Bertha Strategos, and I work in health care and it’s truly an honor to be here tonight to address both of you.
DOLE: Thank you.
MS. STRATEGOS: Being in health care — we have talked about a little bit about health care tonight, but mainly Medi-Cal and Medicare have been mentioned, but the private sector is a problem. Managed care is taking over, especially in California. And because of that, the quality of care is going downhill. There are many, many people who cannot get the tests that they need when they need them, and because of that, they are dying needlessly. There are many, many more lawsuits being presented against the managed care industry because of this. And I think it’s a real problem that needs to be addressed. What would you do if you were president?
DOLE: Well, one thing I did was oppose the government takeover health care that President Clinton offered in 1993, which created 17 new taxes and 50 new bureaucracies and price controls, because we were afraid the very thing you mentioned would have happened. Everybody would have been forced into managed care. You couldn’t have chosen your own doctor and that would have been the end. And I think right now we got to go back. I know they’ve appointed a commission to take a look at managed care. Maybe that’s part of the answer. But it seems to me if we start to take choices away from people and if we drive them into one type care, eliminate fee-for-service altogether or eliminate the fact you can go to your own doctor, you have to go somewhere else, then I think we’ve taken a giant step backward in the United States of America. We have the best health care delivery system in the world and we want to keep it that way. That’s why we opposed the government take over health care plan that President Clinton tried and tried and tried to get through Congress. Didn’t get it done. And ended up we had more votes than he had, then they decided to pull the plug. It was a big, big mistake. Now whether or not he’ll do that again I’ve heard some of the people say, well, that’s the model we ought to use and if he’s reelected maybe he will come back and try it again. I hope not. I hope not in both cases. But it does seem to me that you’ve raised a very important point that needs to be addressed. You’re going to have to watch it. Gonna have to take a look at all the managed care going on in California, or we’re going to end up losing our best care that we have in the world.
CLINTON: I’m just curious. How many of you are under managed care plans? Raise your hand if you’re in managed care plan. How many of you like it?
DOLE: Two.
CLINTON: Well, one of the things that I tried to do was to make sure that everybody in the country who was under a managed care plan should at least have three choices of plans, and would have the right to get out without penalty every year. Now that’s not a government takeover. That’s like the family of medical-leave law; it just tries to set the rules of the game. I’m strongly in favor of a federal bill to repeal any gag rules on providers. In other words, I believe that doctors should not be able to be kicked out of managed care plans just because they tell the patients what they need and what more expensive care options might be. If we’re saving money and managing resources better, that’s a good thing. If we’re saving money and depriving people of care, that’s a bad thing. A good place to start is to say no managed care provider can gag a doctor and kick the doctor out of the managed care plan for the doctor, telling the patient, you need a more expensive test, you need a more expensive procedure, your health requires it.
LEHRER: Senator Dole.
DOLE: Well, I don’t have any quarrel with that. I think that would help. But I think what we want to avoid is falling back into this nationalized health care system that President Clinton wanted to give us in 1993. If that isn’t a liberal idea, I’ve never heard one. 17 new taxes, price controls, 50 new bureaucracies. We’d have that trouble all over America. We need to deal with managed care. It not only happened in California. It’s happening in other states that we visit, too. It’s a national problem. Not just a state problem.
LEHRER: The next question is for President Clinton in this section. Yes, ma’am. Yes.
MS. O’CONNOR: I would sort of like — Colleen O’Connor. I teach history and political science in San Diego Mesa College right up the road here. And I would like to tee off from the original question by another teacher and speak for those people that aren’t here tonight. 63 percent of the American people are not participating that are eligible to vote, not even participating in the process. Several parties can’t even get in the debate; the Green Party, the Reform Party, the Natural Law Party, all of these people are basically opted out of what we’re still participating in. If we in fact are going to bring the country back together and be all faces around the table, the new American family, what do you see as something the president can do to begin that process to bring them back in?
CLINTON: First of all, I think it’s important to make voting more accessible. That’s why I strongly supported the Motor Voter law. There was a big story I think in U.S.A. Today of the millions of people who have now registered because of it. Secondly, I think we need to look at making the elections more accessible. You know several states now are letting people vote over three weeks. A lot of people are busy and it’s hard for them to just get there and vote. Third thing I think we need is more forums like this, which is one of the reasons I have so strongly supported campaign finance reform. Because if you want to cut the cost of campaigns, you have to open the airways, because what drives the cost of campaigns are the cost of advertising on television, radio, newspaper, mass mailing. And if you open the airways to more things like this, you see it’s not just you that are participating here. For every one of you who stood up here and asked a question tonight, I promise you there’s a 100,000 Americans who said I wish I could have asked that question. So I think we have to change the nature of politics. The last thing I think we should do is something I have been trying to do since I have been president, is every time I do something in a public way, I try to have a real American citizen there who is directly affected by it so that people can see the connection of what happens way across the country, in Washington with more police on the street, in San Diego, clean up the sewage here in San Diego, doubling the border guards here in Southern California, that there is a connection between what we do way back there and what we do here. Those are my best ideas about it.
DOLE: Well, I don’t know of any perfect solution. I have been in politics for some time, and I worry about the people who don’t vote. And I wonder if it’s our fault, the candidates’ fault. People say, “I don’t care. One vote doesn’t make a difference.” I can give you hundreds of — you can probably give me 200 cases where one vote made a difference. I know it made a lot of difference many times in the Congress. Campaign finance might help. It might help the contributions from coming in from Indonesia or other foreign countries, rich people in those countries, and then being sent back after the L.A. Times discovers it, $250,000. But maybe there ought to be more debates. I would be willing to have another debate this year. We can invite all the candidates. And talk about the economy. If we don’t get the economy to grow, if we don’t cut taxes, and give people child credits, and cut the capital gains rate, and get this economy growing, we’re going to limp into the next century. If we grow the economy it’s going to help Social Security. It’s going to help jobs. It’s going to help everything.
CLINTON: Let me make one other suggestion, because you’re a teacher, you can have an impact on that. One of the things I think that really frustrates people is that so often political campaigns seem to be more about the politicians that are running than the people. And there is a connection. And I think what we have to do is convince people there is a big difference, if you vote one way you will have a Department of Education in the 21st century, if you vote the other way, you won’t. If you vote one way you will have an expansion of family leave. If you vote the other way, you will be lucky to save it. But these are important questions. And people have to decide. I think that the American people also need to be a little more responsible and think about whether there’s a connection with their lives and what we do in Washington.
LEHRER: For Senator Dole, in this section, on the back row. Yes, ma’am.
MS. SIEFERT: I’m Iris Siefert and I’m unemployed.
DOLE: Iris.
MS. SIEFERT: Iris. Senator Dole, we talked about Social Security for us baby boomers. But shouldn’t we be saving and investing for our own retirement as well? Are you planning any incentives to encourage us to take care of ourselves rather than to rely on the government and on Social Security when we retire?
DOLE: Well, we have in our economic pack, — individual retirement accounts where we think it will encourage savings. You can also use those accounts for health care or education or a first home. We’re doing that precisely, and I think one thing sooner or later we’re going to have to consider is take a look at the Social Security system. Because we’ve got a lot of people advocating we don’t want to put our money into Social Security. You have to be very careful of that because you have to protect the people who are already in the pipeline. It’s something you might consider. I’m not suggesting it will be done, but at least we ought to look at it. It’s been looked, When I was chairman of the finance committee which handled Social Security we looked at all these options, and one thing we’ve got to make certain, when I used to go home my mother would tell me all I’ve got is my Social Security, don’t touch it. And we didn’t touch it. We preserved it. And I’m an optimist. Your your Social Security is going to be there when you retire. We will fix it. It will probably happen in the year 2012 or 2015. In 1983 we thought we had a 75 -year fix. It didn’t work. Much, much less, but at least we fixed it for some time and 37 to 40 million people get their checks on time. So we need to preserve the system. And we need to make it stronger. But we also need to look at some options, whether or not we — depending on what the options are. In fact, they have got a commission right now in Congress, a bipartisan commission, looking at all the different options they will present to the next Congress. so I think we will wait, see what they present, take a look at it.
CLINTON: Iris, this is one where we have some agreement, I think. Only about half the people in this country have pension plans. And Social Security is not enough for a lot of people to live on, or at least is not enough for them to maintain anything like their previous lifestyle. So we’ve got to figure out how are we going to have more people with pension plans, and pension coverage has been declining as more and more people work for small businesses and fewer people work for big businesses. So what, what is in my plan and I think it’s almost identical in Senator Dole’s plans is we make more people eligible to save in an IRA and let couples, married couples save more and then they could withdraw from it tax-free if they needed to, for medical emergencies or buy a home or education, but they could also save to supplement retirement. In addition to that, we just passed a sweeping small business reform that makes it easier for small business people to take out 401 K plans for themselves and employees and much easier for employees to carry it from job to job. My best friend from grade school is a computer software salesman and he told me last time he changed employers it took him nine months to figure out how to transfer his 401K plan. Now none of that will happen anymore. I hope over the next ten years you will see a big increase over the percentage of people that have pension plans, plus a secure Social Security system.
DOLE: Did you say you’re unemployed?
MS. SIEFERT: Yes.
DOLE: See, the first thing we have to do is get you a job. And that’s the economic package again. Create jobs and opportunities. Reduce the capital gains rate. Reduce regulatory reform. Stop some of this senseless litigation and let people work in America. And I think that’s that’s the thrust we will make. Obviously if Social Security is a very important program, it should — it will be preserved. Democrats or Republicans, it will be preserved. We want to make certain we protect those in the pipeline just as we did back in 1983 and we did it on a bipartisan basis. We took it out of politics. people get so tired of politics. We ought to do the same with Medicare. Maybe we can make a deal here tonight.
LEHRER: All right. The question’s is for President Clinton. Does anybody have a foreign affairs question in this section? Yes, sir.
MR. SMITH: Good evening. I’m Michael Smith. I’m an electronics technician in the Navy. My question was how you plan to deal with the trade deficit with Japan.
CLINTON: Let me tell you what we have done. We have concluded with Japan 21 — about to be 22 — trade agreements now. And since we did that, in the areas where we concluded, trade agreements or exports to Japan have gone up by 85 percent in the last four years and our trade deficit with Japan has gone down. Until about five months ago the Japanese economy was in a deep recession. It’s coming back now, so they can buy even more American products, and I think it will go down more. But I’m very — that’s one of the real success stories here of the work we’ve done. We’re selling Japanese rice from California for the first time. I visited a Chrysler dealership in Tokyo. I visited a Jeep plant, oldest plant in America, a plant in Toledo, Ohio, where they’re going to export 41,000 right hand drive Jeeps this year, and they’ve got 700 new jobs because of it. There’s no easy way to do this when you’re dealing with an economy that’s traditionally been more closed than one that’s traditionally been more open. You have to gut it out, issue by issue by issue. We agreed in principle on an insurance agreement, and we’re working on three or four other areas now, but the way you have to do it is make sure you’re competitive. We’re the most competitive country in the world now, and then just fight to open those markets and go try to make the sale, and that’s what our trade ambassador our commerce secretary and all the other people in our administration are trying to do.
DOLE: Well, the bottom line is we have to stop exporting jobs here. There are 357, 000 good jobs — manufacturing jobs, which are lost. And I assume some of those are because of our trading partners. We didn’t have access to their markets. We ought to insist on access. If we don’t have access to their markets the same way they’ve access our markets, we ought to say, “Wait, that’s enough. Time out. When you give us access, we’ll give you access.” It’s very hard to get into the Japan market, as everybody knows. They want to get into our market. They sell a lot of automobiles here, create a lot of jobs — those who sell exports. And that’s very important to the economy, but I think we want to make certain. I supported the President’s trade policy. But we got to be more aggressive. Once you have a policy, then you have to go out and be aggressive and enforce that policy. There are American jobs that are being lost. This is what Ross Perot complains about. And I’d say to the Reform party, take a look at the Republican party. We’re the reform party, and we’re going to make things better, and one of the things we’re going to do is stop exporting jobs.
CLINTON: Let me say again, we’ve had over 200 separate trade agreements in the last four years. By far, the largest number in American history — not just the big ones you read about, but a lot of smaller ones. And now what we have to do is to focus on those things we’re real good at and make sure we’re getting a fair deal. We just had a pretty serious dispute with China because they were copying our CDs, and costing thousands of jobs in places like California. So we have — as we said, if you want to keep doing business and selling your products over here, you’re going to have to quit pirating our CDs, and they agreed to do things and verify that they had done it, which will make the problem much better. There is not a simple answer. You have to work on this day in and day out, every month ,every year, every issue, to make sure that we have not only free trade but fair trade. I’m proud that we’re better off on that than we were four years ago.
LEHRER: The next question is for Senator Dole — in this section. Yes, sir?
MR. KITE: Rod Kite, minister.
DOLE: Hi, Rod.
MR. KITE: This great nation has been established by the founding fathers who possessed a very strong Christian belief in godly principles. If elected president of the United States, what could you do to return this nation to these basic principles? And also, do you feel that the president — the office of president has the responsibility to set the role example to inspire our young people?
DOLE: Well no doubt about it, our founding fathers had a great deal of wisdom. In addition to what you mentioned, they also were concerned about this all-powerful central government in Washington, D.C., that’d in effect confiscate your property, so — I carry it in my pocket — I can’t pull it out or I’d violate the rules — a copy of the Tenth Amendment which says we ought to return power to the states and the people, the people here. You ought to make more decisions. Honor, duty, and country, that’s what America is all about. Certainly the President of the United States, the highest office in the world, the most important office in the world, has a responsibility to young people, as we talked about earlier. To everyone. By example. And when it comes to public ethics, he has a responsibility. And you have 30-some in your administration, either left or being investigated or in jail or whatever, then you’ve got an ethical problem. This is public ethics; I’m not talking about private ethics. Talking about public ethics. When you have 900 files gathered up by some guy who is a bouncer in a bar and hired a security officer to collect files, in Watergate — I know a person who went to jail for looking at one file, one FBI file. There are 900 sequestered in the White House. 900. People like you. Why should they be rifling through your files? The president has a great responsibility. That’s one that I understand and certainly will carry out.
CLINTON: This is the most religious, great country in history. And yet, interestingly enough, we have the most religious freedom of any country in the world, including the freedom not to believe. And now we have all these people just up the road in Los Angeles County, we have people from 150 different racial and ethnic groups and tons of different religions, but the fundamental tenets of virtually every religion are the same, and what I try to do is to support policies that would respect religion and then help parents inculcate those values to their children. Let me very briefly give you some examples. One of my proudest moments was signing the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, that says the government has got to bend over backwards before we interfere with religious practice. So I changed the Justice Department’s effort to get a church to pay back a man tithe, because he was bankrupt when he gave it. I have supported character education programs in our schools, drug-free schools programs. I supported giving parents a V-chip on their television so if they don’t want their young kids to watch things they shouldn’t watch, they wouldn’t have to. That is the kind of thing we have to do, give people like you and our families the power to give those values to our children.
DOLE: I think it’s — before I came in, my wife and daughter and I had a prayer. Because it’s God’s will, whatever happens. It’s God’s will, it’ll happen. The constitutional amendment for voluntary prayer in school, in my view would be a great idea. I support it; the president opposes it. It seems to me the president, whoever the president may be, this is one of his highest responsibilities. People look to the President of the United States more than any other person in America. And that’s the way it’s always been, and that’s the way it always will be.
LEHRER: All right. This is our last question. It goes to President Clinton and it’s from this section. Yes, ma’am.
MS. DUBE: My name is Yvette Dube and I too am a minister. I’m with the Universal Metropolitan Community Churches. President Clinton, perhaps you can help me with something tonight. I heard Mr. Dole say several times “all of us together,” and when he was asked if he would support equal rights and employment for gay and lesbian people, you said that you favored that, and he said that he did not believe in special rights. And I thought the question was equal rights for all people. And I don’t understand why people are using the term “special rights” when the question is “equal rights.” Could you help me in understanding that?
CLINTON: I want to answer your question, but let me say one other thing. We don’t need a constitutional amendment for kids to pray, and what I did was to have the justice department and the education department for the first time ever issue a set of guidelines that we gave to every school in America, saying that children could not be interfered with in religious advocacy when they were praying, when they were doing whatever they could do under the constitution, just because they were on a public school ground, and I think anyone who’s experienced this will tell you that our administration has done more than any in years to clarify the freedom of religion in the public square, including in the public schools. Now, I think I have to let Senator Dole speak for himself. It wouldn’t be fair for me to do that. I would wind up — I mean, it’s the last question and I would mischaracterize it to try to make you happy. Let me tell you what I feel. We have a lot of differences in our country, and some of us believe that other people’s decisions are wrong, even immoral. But under our constitution, if you show up tomorrow and obey the law, and you work hard and you do what you’re supposed to do, you are entitled to equal treatment. That’s the way the system works. All over the world, people are being torn apart — Bosnia, the Middle East, Northern Ireland, Rwanda, Burundi — you name it — because of all their differences. We still have some of that hatred inside us. You see it in the church burnings. And one of the things I’ve tried hardest to do is to tell the American people that we have to get beyond that, we have to understand that we’re stronger when we unite around shared values instead of being divided by our differences.
LEHRER: Senator Dole.
DOLE: Well, I hope I made my answer clear. I said I’m opposed to discrimination. You know we’ve suffered discrimination in the disability community. There are 43 million of us. And I can recall cases where people would cross the street rather than meet somebody in a wheelchair. So we want to end discrimination. I think that answers itself. No discrimination in America. We’ve made that clear. And I would just say that it seems to me that that’s the way it ought to be. We shouldn’t discriminate — race, color, whatever — life-style, disability. This is America. And we’re all proud of it. But we’re not there yet. What we need is good, strong leadership going in the next century. I’m sorry we didn’t have a foreign policy question, because just this week Secretary Christopher said, “Well, we really didn’t know much the first couple of years about foreign policy.” Now that was quite an admission. It underscores what I had to say in the Hartford debate, that there is really no foreign policy in this administration. It’s sort of ad hoc, just whatever comes up, we’ll deal with it. Unfortunately, we didn’t have more questions on that.
CLINTON: Let me say again, there is no more important responsibility for the president than to say if you believe in the constitution, the Bill of Rights, and the Declaration of Independence, that’s all we need to know. And you can be part of our America and you can walk across that bridge to the 21st century with us. And we are not well served when we attack each other in a kind of ad hominem way. It doesn’t create jobs. It doesn’t educate children. It doesn’t solve problems. We need to be disagreeing on ideas, honestly, and talking about the future. The future will be the greatest time in this country’s history if we can beat this division that is bedeviling the whole rest of the world.
LEHRER: All right. Now we go to the closing statement. Senator Dole, you’re first. Two minutes, sir.
DOLE: Well, let me thank everybody here at the University and, Jim, thank you. All the people who may still be watching or viewing. This is what it’s all about. It’s not about me. It’s not about President Clinton. It’s about the process. It’s about selecting a president of the United States. So we have our differences. We should have our differences. Mentioned other parties. They have their differences. We all agreed it would be a pretty dull place. We should have more debates. Maybe we will have another debate on the economy. But I would just say this. This is the highest honor that I have ever had in my life, to think that somebody from Russell, Kansas, somebody who grew up living in a basement apartment, someone whose parents didn’t finish high school, somebody who spent about 39 months in hospitals after World War II, someone who uses a buttonhook every day to get dressed. Somebody who understands that there’re real Americans out there with real problems, whether soccer moms, or the single parents, the families or the seniors, or people with disabilities, whoever it may be. There are some very fundamental differences in this campaign. President Clinton opposes term limits, President Clinton opposes a constitutional amendment to balance the budget. President Clinton opposes voluntary prayer amendment. Opposes an amendment to protect the flag of the United States of America. People give their lives. Couple of service men here. They sacrifice, they give everything for America. We ought to protect the American flag with a constitutional amendment. But beyond that we need to address the economy. I will just say my time is running out here. It’s a very proud moment for me. What I want the voters to do is to make a decision. And I want them to be proud of their vote in the years ahead. Proud that they voted for the right candidate. Proud that they voted hopefully for me. And I’ll just make you one promise, my word is good. Democrats and Republicans said Bob Dole’s word is good. I keep my word. I promise you the economy is going to get better. We’re going to have a good economic package. We’re going into the next century a better America. Thank you.
CLINTON: Thank you, Jim. And thank you, ladies and gentlemen, and all the people who are watching. One thing I would like to say is I agree with what Senator Dole said. It’s a remarkable thing in a country like ours, a man who grew up in Russell, Kansas, and one who was born to a widowed mother in Hope, Arkansas, could wind up running for president. Could have a chance to serve as president. First thing I want to say is thank you for giving me the chance to be president. This election is about two different visions about how we should go into the 21st Century. Would we be better off as I believe, working together to give each other the tools we need to make the most of our God-given potential, or are we better off saying, you’re on your own? Would we be better off building that bridge to the future together so we can all walk across it or saying you can get across yourself? If you don’t agree — leave this room with anything else tonight and if the people watching us don’t leave with anything else, I hope you will leave with this. This is a real important election. The world is changing dramatically in how we work and how we live, how we relate to each other, huge changes. And the decisions we make will have enormous practical consequences. So we’ve talked about our responsibility tonight. I want to talk about your responsibility, and your responsibility. Your responsibility is to show up on November the 5th. Because you’re going to decide whether we’re going to balance the budget now, but protect Medicare, Medicaid, education and the environment. You will decide whether we’re going to keep fighting crime with a Brady Bill, assault weapons and finish putting those 100,000 police. Whether we’re going to move a million people from welfare to work. Whether we’re going to give our families more protection for their kids against drugs and tobacco and gangs and guns. Whether we’re going to give our children a world-class education. Where every eight-year-old can read. Every 12-year-old can log in on the Internet. Every 18-year-old can go to college. If we do those things we will build that bridge to the 21st Century and the greatest country in history will be even greater. Thank you.
LEHRER: Thank you, Senator. Thank you, Mr. President. This concludes — this is the last of the three 1996 presidential and vice-presidential debates.