Yes. First of all is to recognize a tremendous economic strength in this country and to set the putting to – back to work of our people as a top priority. This is uh – an effort that ought to be done primarily by strong leadership in the White House, the inspiration of our people, the tapping of uh – business, agriculture, industry, labor and government at all levels to work on this uh project. We’ll never have uh – an end to the inflationary spiral, and we’ll never have a balanced budget until we get our people back to work. There are several things that can be done specifically that are not now being done. First of all, to channel research and development funds into areas that will provide uh large numbers of jobs. Secondly, we need to have a commitment in the uh private sector uh – to cooperate with government in matters like housing. Here a very small investment of taxpayer’s money – in the housing field can bring large numbers of extra jobs, and the guarantee of mortgage loans, and the uh – putting forward of uh – two-0-two programs for housing for older people and so forth to cut down the roughly 20 percent unemployment that now exists in the – in the construction industry. Another thing is to deal with our – uh needs in the central cities, where the unemployment rate is extremely high: sometimes among minority groups, or those who don’t speak English, or who’re black, or young people, or – 40 percent of the employment. Here a CCC type program would be appropriate to channel money into the ah – cha- in – in into the sharing with the private sector and also local and state governments to employ young people who are now out of work. Another very important – uh aspect of our – uh economy would be to increase production in every way possible, uh to hold down – uh taxes on individuals, and to uh shift the tax burdens onto those who have avoided paying taxes in the past. These uh – kinds of specific things, uh none of which are being done now, would be a great help in – in reducing uh unemployment. There is uh – uh an additional factor that needs to be done and covered very – very succinctly, and that is, to make sure that we have a good relationship between management – business on the one hand, and labor, on the other. In a > Transfer interrupted! ery high, we might channel specific uh targeted job – job – uh opportunities by paying part of the salary of unemployed people – uh and also sharing with uh – local governments the uh – payment of salaries which would uh – let us cut down the unemployment rate much lower, before we hit the inflationary level. But I believe that by the end of the first four years of uh – of the next term we could have the unemployment down to 3 percent adult unemployment, which is about uh – 4 to 4 and a half percent overall uh controlled inflation rate and have a uh balance of growth of about – uh 4 to 6 percent, around 5 percent which would give us a balanced budget. Yes, in unemployment that is likely to create additional pressure on prices, how willing are you to consider an incomes policy, in other words, wage and price controls? Well – we now have such uh – a low utilization of uh – our productive capacity – uh about 73 percent; I think it’s about the lowest since the Great Depression years – and such a high unemployment rate now – uh 7.9 percent – that – uh we have a long way to go in getting people to work before we have the inflationary pressures. And I think this would uh – this would be uh easy to accomplish, to get jobs down, without having strong in- inflationary pressures that – that would be necessary. I would not favor the uh – payment of uh – of a given fixed income to people unless they are not able to work. But with tax incentives for the low-income groups we could build up their uh – income levels uh – above the poverty level and not uh make welfare more uh – profitable than – than work. Well, Mr. Ford is – is uh changing uh considerably his previous philosophy. The present tax structure is a disgrace to this country; it’s just a welfare program for the rich. As a matter of fact, uh – 25 percent of the total tax deductions, go for only 1 percent of the richest people in this country, and over 50 percent of the tax uh credits go for the 14 percent of the richest people in this country. When Mr. Ford first became president in – in August of 1974, the first thing he did in – in October was to ask for a $4.7 billion increase in taxes on our people in the midst of the heaviest recession, since uh – since the great depression of nineteen uh – of the 1940s. In uh – January of 1975 he asked for a tax change: a $5.6 billion increase on low-and-middle-income private individuals, a six and a half billion dollar decrease on the corporations and the special interests. In uh – December of uh – 1975 he vetoed the roughly 18 to 20 billion dollar uh tax-reduction bill that had been passed by the Congress, and then he came back later on in January of this year and he did advocate a $10 billion tax reduction, but it would be offset by a $6 billion increase this coming January in deductions for Social Security payments and for unemployment compensation. The whole philosophy of the Republican party, including uh – my opponent, has been to pile on taxes on low-income people to take ’em off on the corporations. As a matter fact, in – sin- since the late sixties when Mr. Nixon took office, we’ve had a reduction in uh – in the percentage of taxes paid by corporations from 30 percent down to about 20 percent. We’ve had an increase in taxes paid by individuals, payroll taxes, from14 Percent up to 20 percent. And this is what the Republicans have done to us. And this is why a tax reform is so important. Well, as a matter of fact there is. If we assume the ah – uh – a rate of growth of our economy, equivalent to what it was during President Johnson, President Kennedy, even before the – the – the – uh wa uh – Vietnese- namese War, and if we assume that at the end of the four-year period we can cut our unemployment rate down to 4 to 4 and a half percent – under those circumstances, even assuming no elimination of unnecessary programs and assuming an increase in the ad- in the allotment of money to finance programs, increasing as the inflation rate does – my economic projections, I think confirmed by the House uh – and the Senate committees, have been with the $60 billion extra amount of money that can be spent in fiscal year ’81 which will be the last year of this next term. Within that sixty-billion dollars increase there would be fit the programs that I promised the American people. I might say too, that – that if we see that these goals cannot be reached – and I believe they’re reasonable goals – then I would cut back on the rate of implement- implementation of new programs in order to accommodate a balanced budget by fiscal year ’81 which is the last year of the next term. I believe that we ought to have a balanced budget during normal economic circumstances. And uh – these projections have been very carefully made. I stand behind them. And if they should be in error slightly on the down side, then I’ll phase in the programs that we’ve uh – advocated, more slowly. Well, the uh – the assumption that – that you uh – have described as different is in the rate of growth of our economy. I believe that it’s accurate to say that – that the – that the committees to whom you refer with the – the employment that you uh – state, and with the 5 to 5 and a half percent growth rate in our economy, that the uh – projections would be a uh – a $60 billion increase in the amount of money that we’d have to spend in l981 compared to now. And uh – with that uh – in that framework would befit the – any improvements in the programs. Now this does not include uh – any uh – uh extra control over uh unnecessary spending, the weeding out of obsolete or obsolescent programs. Uh – we’ll have uh – a safety version built in with complete reorganization of the executive branch of government which I am pledged to do. The present bureaucratic structure of the – of the Federal Government is a mess. And if I’m elected president that’s gonna be a top priority of mine to completely revise the structure of the federal government, to make it economical, efficient, purposeful and manageable for a change. And also, I’m going to institute zero-based budgeting which I used four years in Georgia, which uh – assesses every program every year, and eliminates those programs that are obsolete or obsolescent. But with these projections, we will have a balanced budget by fiscal year 1981, if I’m elected president. Keep my promises to the American people. And it’s just predicated on very modest, but I think accurate, projections of employment increases and uh – a growth in our national economy equal to what was experienced under Kennedy, Johnson, before the Vietnam War. Well I think it’s uh… very difficult for President Ford to uh – explain the difference between the pardon of President Nixon and – and uh – his attitude toward those who violated the draft laws. As a matter of fact – now- I don’t advocate amnesty; I advocate pardon. There’s a difference in my opinion – uh and in accordance with the ruling of the Supreme Court and accordance with the definition in the dictionary. Amnesty means that – that you uh – that what you did was right. Pardon means that what you did, whether it’s right or wrong, you’re forgiven for it. And I do advocate a pardon for – for draft evaders. I think it’s accurate to say that in uh – two years ago when Mr. Nixon – Mr. Ford put in this uh amnesty that three times as many deserters were uh – excused as were – as were the uh – the ones who evaded the draft. But I think that now is the time to heal our country after the Vietnam War and I think that what the people are concerned about is not the – uh pardon or the amnesty of uh – those who evaded the draft, but – but whether or not our crime system is – is fair. We’ve got a – a sharp distinction drawn between white collar crime – the – the – the big shots who are rich, who are influential uh very seldom go to jail; those who are poor and – and who have uh no influence – uh quite often are the ones who are punished. And – and the whole uh subject of crime is one that concerns our people very much, and I believe that the fairness of it is – is what – uh – is a – is a major problem that addresses our – our leader and this is something that hasn’t been addressed adequately by – by this administration. But I – I hope to have a complete uh responsibility on my shoulders to help bring about a – a fair uh – criminal justice system and also to – to bring about uh – an end to the – to the divise- divisiveness that has occurred in our country uh as a result of the Vietnam War. I can’t say for sure that we would have fewer federal employees when I go out of office than when I come in. It took me about three years to completely reorganize the Georgia government. The last year I was in office uh – our budget was – was actually less than it was a year before, uh which showed a great uh improvement. Also, we had a – a 2 percent increase in the number of employees the last year. But it was a tremendous shift from administrative jobs into the delivery of services. For instance, we uh – completely revised our prison system. We established eighty-four new mental health treatment centers. And we shifted people out of administrative jobs into the field to deliver better services. The same thing will be done uh – at the federal government level. I – I accomplished this with s – substantial reductions in employees in some departments. For instance, in the Transportation Department uh we had uh – we cut back about 25 percent of the total number of employees. In giving our people better mental health care, we increased the number of employees. But the efficiency of it, the simplicity of it, the uh ability of people to understand their own government and control it was a – was a uh – substantial benefit derived from complete reorganization. We uh – have got to do that at the federal government level. If we don’t, the bureaucratic mess is going to continue. There’s no way for our people now to understand what their government is. There’s no way to get the answer to a question. When you come to Washington to try to – as a governor – to try to begin a new program for your people, like uh the treatment of drug addicts, I found there were thirteen different federal agencies that I had to go to, to manage the uh drug treatment program. In the Georgia government we only had one agency responsible for drug treatment. This is the kind of change that would be made. And uh – it would be of – of tremendous benefit in long-range planning, in tight budgeting, uh saving the taxpayers’ money, making the government more efficient, cutting down on bureaucratic waste, having a clear delineation of authority and responsibility of employees, and giving our people a better chance to understand and control their government. Well, Mr. Ford takes the uh – same attitude that the Republicans always take. In the last three months before an election, they’re always for the programs that they always fight the other three-and-one-half years. Uh – I remember when uh – Herbert Hoover was against uh – jobs for people. I remember when Alf Landon was against Social Security and uh – later President Nixon, sixteen years ago, was telling the public that John Kennedy’s proposals would bankrupt the country and would double the cost. The best thing to do is to look at the record uh – of Mr. Ford’s Administration and Mr. Nixon’s before his. Uh – we had last year a $65 billion deficit – the largest deficit in the history of our country – more of a deficit spending than we had in the entire eight-year period under President Johnson and President Kennedy. We’ve got five hundred thousand more Americans out of jobs today than were out of work three months ago and since Mr. Ford’s been in office two years, we’ve had a 50 percent increase in unemployment from five million people out of work to two and a half million more people out of work and a total of seven and a half million. We’ve also got uh – a comparison between himself and Mr. Nixon. He’s got four times the size of the deficits that Mr. Nixon even had himself. This uh – talking about more people at work – uh is distorted because with a 14 percent increase in the cost of living in the last uh – two years, it means that – that women and young people have had to go to work when they didn’t want to because their fathers didn’t make enough to pay the increased cost of uh – food and uh housing and clothing. We have uh – in this last uh two years alone a hundred and twenty billion dollars total deficits under President Ford and uh – at the same time we’ve had, in the last eight years, a doubling in the number of bankruptcies for small business: we’ve had a negative growth in our – in our national economy measured in real dollars. The take-home pay of a worker in this country is actually less now than it was in 1968 – measured in real dollars. This is the kind of record that’s there and talk about the future and a drastic change or conversion on the part of Mr. Ford as of last minute is one that just doesn’t go. Well among my other experiences in the past, I’ve – I’ve been a nuclear engineer, and did graduate work in this field. I think I know the – the uh capabilities and limitations of atomic power. But the energy – uh policy of our nation is one that uh has not yet been established under this administration. I think almost every other developed nation in the world has an energy policy except us. We have seen uh – the Federal Energy Agency established, for instance. Uh – in the crisis of 1973 it was supposed to be a temporary agency, uh now it’s permanent, it’s enormous, it’s growing every day. I think the Wall Street Journal uh reported not too long ago they have a hundred and twelve public relations experts working for the Federal Energy Agency to try to justify to the American people its own existence. We’ve got to have a – a firm way to handle the energy question. The reorganization proposal that I have put forward is one uh first step. In addition to that, we need to have – uh a realization that we’ve got uh about thirty-five years worth of oil left in the whole world. We’re gonna run out of oil. When Mr. Nixon made his famous uh speech on Operation Independence we were importing about 35 percent of our oil. Now we’ve increased that amount 25 percent. We now import about 44 percent of our oil. We need to shift from oil to coal. We need to concentrate our research and development effort on uh coal burning and extraction, with safer mines, but also it’s clean burning. We need to shift very strongly toward solar energy and have strict conservation measures. And then as a last resort only, continue to use atomic power. I would certainly uh – not cut out atomic power altogether. We can’t afford to give up that opportunity until later. But to the extent that we continue to use atomic power, I would be responsible as president to make sure that the safety precautions were initiated and maintained. For instance, some that have been forgotten; we need to have the reactor core – below ground level, the entire power plant that uses atomic uh – power tightly sealed and a heavy – heavy vacuum maintained. There ought to be a standardized design. There ought to be a full-time uh – atomic energy specialist, independent of the power company in the control room, full time, twenty-four hours a day, to shut down a plant if an abnormality develops. These kinds of uh – procedures, along with evacuation procedures, adequate insurance, ought to be initiated. So, shift from oil to coal, emphasize research and development on coal use and also on solar power, strict conservation measures, not yield every time that the special interest groups uh – put pressure on the president like uh this administration has done, and use atomic energy only as a last resort with the strictest possible safety precautions. That’s the best overall energy policy in the brief time we have to discuss it. Yes, I would. Some of the things that can be done about this is a change in the rate structure of electric power companies. We uh – now encourage people to waste electricity, and uh – by giving uh – the lowest rates to the biggest users. We don’t do anything to cut down on peak load requirements. We don’t have an adequate requirement for the insulation of homes, for the efficiency of automobiles. And whenever the uh – automobile manufacturers come forward and say they can’t meet the uh – amendments that the Congress has put forward, this Republican administration has delayed the implementation dates. In addition to that, we ought to have a – a shift toward the use of coal, particularly in the Appalachian regions where the coal is located. A lot of uh – very high quality, low-carbon coal, uh – low-sulfur coal is there, it’s where our employment is needed. Uh – this would – would help a great deal. So mandatory conservation measures – yes. Encouragement by the president for people to uh voluntarily conserve – yes. And also the private sector ought to be encouraged to – to bring forward to the public the benefits from efficiency. One bank in uh – Washington, fo- for instance, gives lower interest loans for people who adequately insulate their homes or who buy efficient automobiles. And some major uh – uh – manufacturing companies, like Dow Chemical, have through uh – very effective efficiency mechanism cut down the use of energy by uh – as much as 40 percent with the same out-product. These kinds of things uh – ought to be done, uh they ought to be encouraged and supported, and even required uh by the government, yes. Well, Mr. Ford doesn’t seem to put into perspective the fact that when – when uh five hundred thousand more people are out of work than there were three months ago, while we have two and a half million more people out of work than were when he took office, that this touches human beings. I was in uh – a city in uh – Pennsylvania not too long ago, near here, and uh – there were about four or five thousand people in the audience – it was on a – on a train trip. And I said, “How many uh – adults here are out of work?” About a thousand raised their hands. Mr. Ford uh – actually has fewer people now in the private sector in non-farm jobs than when he took office. And still he talks about – uh success. Seven point nine percent unemployment is a terrible tragedy in this country. He says he’s learned how to match unemployment with inflation. That’s right. We’ve got the highest inflation we’ve had in twenty-five years right now, except under this administration, and that was fifty years ago. And we’ve got uh – the highest unemployment we’ve had uh – under Mr. Ford’s administration, since the Great Depression. This affects human beings, and – and his insensitivity in providing those people a chance to work has made this a welfare administration, and not a work administration. He hasn’t saved $9 billion with his vetoes. There’s only been uh – a net savings of $4 billion. And the cost in unemployment compensation, welfare compensation, and lost revenues has increased $23 billion in the last two years. This is a – a typical attitude that really causes havoc in people’s lives, and then it’s covered over by saying that our country has naturally got a 6 percent unemployment rate, or 7 percent unemployment rate and a 6 percent inflation. It’s a travesty. It shows a lack of leadership. And we’ve never had a president since the War between the States that vetoed more bills. Mr. Ford has vetoed four times as many bills as Mr. Nixon – per year. And eleven of ’em have been overridden. One of his bills that was overridden – he only got one vote in the Senate and seven votes in the House, from Republicans. Right. Now we have uh such a grossly unbalanced tax system – as I said earlier, that it is a disgrace – ah of all the tax – benefits now, 25 percent of ’em go to the 1 percent of the richest people in this country. Over 50 percent – 53 to be exact – percent of the tax benefits go to the 14 percent richest people in this country, and we’ve had a 50 percent increase in payroll deductions since Mr. Nixon went in office eight years ago. Mr. Ford has – has advocated since he’s been in office over $5 billion in reductions for corporations, special interest groups, and the very, very wealthy who derive their income – not from labor – but from investments. That’s got to be changed. A few things that can be done: we have now a deferral system so that the multinational corporations who invest overseas – if they make a million dollars in profits overseas – they don’t have to pay any of their taxes unless they bring their money back into this country. When they don’t pay their taxes, the average American pays the taxes for them. Not only that, but it robs this country of jobs, because instead of coming back with that million dollars and creating a shoe factory, say in New Hampshire or Vermont, if the company takes the money down to Italy and – and builds a shoe factory, they don’t have to pay any taxes on the money. Another thing is a system called DISC which was originally designed, proposed by Mr. Nixon, to encourage exports. This permits a company to create uh – a dummy corporation, to export their products, and then not to pay the full amount of taxes on them. This costs our uh – government about uh – $1.4 billion a year. And when those rich corporations don’t pay that tax, the average American taxpayer pays it for ’em. Another one that’s uh – that’s very important is the uh – is the business deductions, uh – jet airplanes, uh – first class travel, the fifty-dollar martini lunch. The average working person can’t – uh – can’t take advantage of that, but the – the wealthier people – uh can. Uh – another system is where uhh – a dentist can invest money in say, raising cattle and uh – can put in a hundred thousand dollars of his own money, borrow nine hundred thousand dollars – nine hundred mi- thousand dollars – that makes a million – and mark off a great amount of uh – of loss uh – through that procedure. Uh – there was one example, for instance, where uh – somebody uh – produced pornographic movies. They put in $30 thousand of their own money and got a hundred and twenty thousand dollars in tax savings. Well, these special kinds of programs have – have robbed the average taxpayer and have benefited those who are powerful, and who can employ lobbyists, and who can have their CPAs and their lawyers to help them benefit from the roughly uh – eight thousand pages of the tax code. The average uh American person can’t do it. You can’t hire a lobbyist uh out of unemployment compensation checks. Yes. You need about, according to Congressional committees on this, you need about $10 billion. Now you listed some things – the uh – deferral on foreign income as estimated: that would save about $500 million. DISC, you said, was about 1.4 billion. uh – The estimate of the outside, if you eliminated all tax shelters, is 5 billion. So where else would you raise the revenue to provide this tax relief – would you, in fact, do away with all business deductions, and what other kinds of preferences would you do away with? No, I wouldn’t do away with all – uh business deductions. I think that would be a – a very serious mistake. But uh – if – if you could just do away with the ones that are unfair, you could lower taxes for everyone. I would never do anything that would increase the taxes for those who work for a living, or who are presently required to list all their income. What I wanna do is not to raise taxes, but to eliminate loopholes. And this is uh – the point of my first statistics that I gave you – that – that the present tax benefits that have been carved out over a long period of years – fifty years – by sharp tax lawyers and by lobbyists have benefited just the rich. These programs that I described to you earlier – the tax deferrals for overseas, the DISC, and the tax shelters, uh – they only apply to people in the $50 thousand-a-year bracket or up, and I think this is the very best way to approach it. It’s to make sure that everybody pays taxes on the income that they earn and make sure that you take whatever savings there is from the higher income levels and give it to the lower- and middle-income families. Well, it’s not a matter of uh – Republican and Democrat. It’s a matter of leadership or no leadership. President Eisenhower worked with a Democratic Congress very well. Even President Nixon, because he was a strong leader at least, worked with a Democratic Congress very well. Uh – Mr. Ford has vetoed, as I said earlier, four times as many bills per year as Mr. Nixon. Mr. Ford quite often puts forward a program just as a public relations stunt, and never tries to put it through the Congress by working with the Congress. I think under presidents For- uh – Nixon and Eisenhower they passed about 60 to 75 percent of their legislation. This year Mr. Ford will not pass more than 26 percent of all the legislative proposals he puts forward. This is government by stalemate, and we’ve seen almost a complete breakdown in the proper relationship between the president, who represents this country, and the Congress, who collectively also represent this country. We’ve had uh – Republican presidents before who’ve tried to run against a Democratic – uh Congress. And I don’t think it’s uh – the Congress is Mr. Ford’s opponent; but if uh – if – if he insists that uh – that I be responsible for the Democratic Congress, of which I’m – have not been a part, then I think it’s only fair that he be responsible for the Nixon administration in its entirety, of which he was a part. That, I think, is a good balance. But the point is, that – that a president ought to lead this country. Mr. Ford, so far as I know, except for avoiding another Watergate, has not accomplished one single major program for this country. And there’s been a constant squabbling between the president and the Congress, and that’s not the way this country ought to be run. I might go back to one other thing. Mr. Ford has uh – misquoted an AP uh – news story that was in error to begin with. That story reported several times that I would lower taxes for low and middle-income families and uh – that correction was delivered to the White House and I am sure that the president knows about this uh – correction, but he still insists uh – on repeating an erroneous statement. What I have said is that the president ought to have a chance to appoint a chairman of the Federal Reserve Board to have a coterminous uh term; in other words, both of ’em serve the same four – four years. The Congress can modify the supply of money by modifying the income uh tax laws. The president can modify the uh – economic structure of a country by public statements and general attitudes in the budget that he proposes. The Federal Reserve has uh – an independent status that ought to be preserved; I think that Mr. uh – Burns did take a typical, erroneous Republican attitude in the 1973 year when inflation was so high. They assumed that the uh – inflation rate was because of excessive demand and uh – therefore put into effect tight constraint on the economy, very high interest rates, which is typical also of the Republican administration, uh – tried to increase the uh – the tax uh – payments by individuals, and cut the tax payments by corporations. I would have uh – done it opposite. I think the uh – problem should’ve been addressed by increasing productivity, by having uh – put – put people back to work so they could purchase more goods, lower income taxes on individuals, perhaps raise them, if necessary, on corporations in comparison. But uh – Mr. Burns uh – in that respect made a very serious mistake. I would not wanna destroy the – the independence of the uh Federal Reserve – uh Board. But I do think we ought to have a cohesive economic policy with at – at least the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board and the president’s terms being uh – the same and letting the Congress, of course, be the third uh – entity with uh – with independence subject only to the president’s veto. Well, one of the very serious things that’s happened in our government in recent years, and has continued up until now, is a breakdown in the trust among our people in the [twenty-seven-minute delay] There has been too much government secrecy and not uh – not enough respect for the personal privacy of American citizens. Well, tonight we’ve had a chance to talk a lot about the past. But I think it’s time to talk about the future. Our nation in the last eight years has been divided as never before. It’s a time for unity. It’s a time to draw ourselves together: to have a president and a Congress that can work together with mutual respect for a change, cooperating for a change, in the open for a change, so the people can understand their own government. It’s time for government, industry, labor, manufacturing, agriculture, education, other entities in our society to cooperate. And it’s a time for government to understand and to cooperate with our people. For a long time our American citizens have been excluded, sometimes misled, sometimes have been lied to. This is uh – not compatible with the purpose of our nation. I believe in our country. It needs to be competent. The government needs to be well-managed, efficient, economical, We need to have a government that’s sensitive to our people’s needs – to those who are poor, who don’t have adequate health care, who have been cheated too long with our tax programs, who’ve been out of jobs, whose families have been torn apart. We need to restore the faith and the trust of the American people in their own government. In addition to that, we’ve suffered because we haven’t had leadership in this administration. We’ve got a government of stalemate. We’ve lost the vision of what our country can and ought to be. This is not the America that we’ve known in the past. It’s not the America that we have to have in the future. I don’t claim to know all the answers. But I’ve got confidence in my country. Our economic strength is still there. Our system of government – in spite of Vietnam, Cambodia, CIA, Watergate – is still the best system of government on earth. And the greatest resource of all are the two hundred and fifteen million Americans who have within us the strength, the character, the intelligence, the experience, the patriotism, the idealism, the compassion, the sense of brotherhood on which we can rely in the future to restore the greatness to our country We ought not to be excluded from our government anymore. We need a president who can go in – who derives his strength from the people. I owe the special interests nothing. I owe everything to you, the people of this country. And I believe that we can bind our wounds. I believe that we can work together. And I believe that if we can tap the tremendous untapped reservoir of innate strength in this country, that we can once again have a government as good as our people, and let the world know what we still know and hope for – that we still live in the greatest and the strongest and the best country on earth. Well I think this Republican administration has been almost all style, and spectacular, and not substance. We’ve uh – got a chance tonight to talk about, first of all, leadership, the character of our country, and a vision of the future. In every one of these instances, the Ford administration has failed, and I hope tonight that I and Mr. Ford will have a chance to discuss the reasons for those failures. Our country is not strong anymore; we’re not respected anymore. We can only be strong overseas if we’re strong at home; and when I became president we’ll not only be strong in those areas but also in defense – a defense capability second to none. We’ve lost in our foreign policy, the character of the American people. We’ve uh – ignored or excluded the American people and the Congress from participation in the shaping of our foreign policy. It’s been one of secrecy and exclusion. In addition to that we’ve had a chance to became now, contrary to our long-standing beliefs and principles, the arms merchant of the whole world. We’ve tried to buy success from our enemies, and at the same time we’ve excluded from the process the normal friendship of our allies. In addition to that we’ve become fearful to compete with the Soviet Union on an equal basis. We talk about detente. The Soviet Union knows what they want in detente, and they’ve been getting it. We have not known what we’ve wanted and we’ve been out-traded in almost every instance. The other point I wanna make is about our defense. We’ve got to be a nation blessed with a defense capability that’s efficient, tough, capable, well organized, narrowly focused – fighting capability. The ability to fight, if necessary, is the best way to avoid the chance for, or the requirement to fight. And the last point I wanna make is this: Mr. Ford, Mr. Kissinger have uh – continued on with the policies and failures of Richard Nixon. Even the Republican platform has criticized the lack of leadership in Mr. Ford and they’ve criticized the foreign policy of this administration. This is one instance where I agree with – with the Republican platform. I might say this in closing, and that is that as far as foreign policy goes, Mr. Kissinger has been the president of this country. Mr. Ford has shown an absence of leadership, and an absence of a grasp of what this country is and what it ought to be. That’s got to be changed. And that’s one of the major issues in this uh – campaign of 1976. Well, Mr. Ford, unfortunately, has just made a statement that’s not true. I have never advocated a Communist government for Italy. That would obviously be a ridiculous thing for anyone to do who wanted to be president of this country. I think that this is uh – an instance of uh – deliberate distortion, and this has occurred also in the question about defense. As a matter of fact, uh – I’ve never advocated any cut of $15 billion in our defense budget. As a matter of fact, Mr. Ford has made a political football out of the defense budget. About a year ago he cut the Pentagon budget six point eight billion dollars. After he fired James Schlesinger, the political heat got so great that he added back about $3 billion. When Ronald Reagan won the Texas primary election, Mr. Ford added back another one and a half billion dollars. Immediately before the Kansas City convention, he added back another one point eight billion dollars in the defense budget. And his own uh – Office of Management and Budget testified that he had a $3 billion cut insurance added to the defense budget – defense budget under the pressure from the Pentagon. Obviously, this is another indication of trying to use the defense budget for political purposes, which he’s trying to do tonight. Now, we went into south Africa late, after Great Britain, Rhodesia, the black nations had been trying to solve this problem for many, many years. We didn’t go in until right before the election, similar to what was taking place in 1972, when Mr. Kissinger announced peace is at hand just before the election at that time. And we have weakened our position in NATO because the other countries in Europe supported the democ- democratic forces in Portugal long before we did; we stuck to the Portugal dictatorships much longer than other democracies did in this world. Well, I’m not gonna name my cabinet before I get elected. I’ve got a little ways to go before I start doing that. But I have uh – an adequate background, I believe. I am a graduate of the U.S. Naval Academy, the first military graduate since uh – Eisenhower. I’ve served as the Governor of Georgia and have traveled extensively in foreign countries and South America, Central America, Europe, the Middle East and in Japan. I’ve traveled the last twenty-one months among the people of this country. I’ve talked to them and I’ve listened. And I’ve seen at first hand, in a very vivid way, the deep hurt that’s come to this country in the aftermath of Vietnam and Cambodia, Chile, and Pakistan, and Angola, and Watergate, CIA revelations. What we were formerly so proud of – the strength of our country, its uh – moral integrity, the representation in foreign affairs of what our people are, what our Constitution stands for, has been gone. And in the secrecy that has surrounded our foreign policy in the last few years, uh – the American people, the Congress have been excluded. I believe I know what this country ought to be. I’ve uh – been one who’s loved my nation as many Americans do, and I believe that there’s no limit placed on what we can be in the future, if we can harness the tremendous resources – militarily, economically, and the stature of our people, the meaning of the Constitution, in the future. Every time we’ve made a serious mistake in foreign affairs, it’s been because the American people have been excluded from the process. If we can just tap the intelligence and ability, the sound common sense and the good judgment of the American people, we can once again have a foreign policy to make us proud instead of ashamed. And I’m not gonna exclude the American people from that process in the future, as Mr. Ford and Kissinger have done. This is what it takes to have a sound foreign policy strong at home, strong defense, permanent commitments, not betray the principles of our country, and involve the American people and the Congress in the shaping of our foreign policy. Every time Mr. Ford speaks from a position of secrecy in negotiations, in secret – in secret treaties that’ve been uh – pursued and achieved, in supporting dictatorships, in ignoring human rights, we are weak and the rest of the world knows it. So these are the ways that we can restore the strength of our country, and they don’t require long experience in foreign policy. Nobody has that except a president who has served a long time or a secretary of state. But my background, my experience, my knowledge of the people of this country, my commitment to our principles that don’t change – those are the best bases to correct the horrible mistakes of this administration and restore our own country to a position of leadership in the world. First of all, I would quit conducting the decision-making process in secret, as has been a characteristic of Mr. Kissinger and Mr. Ford. In many instances we’ve made agreements, like in Vietnam, uh – that have uh – been revealed later on to our uh – embarrassment. Recently Ian Smith, the uh – president of uh – Rhodesia, announced that he had unequivocal commitments from Mr. Kissinger that he could not reveal. The American people don’t know what those commitments are. We’ve seen uh – in the past the destruction of elected governments, like in Chile, and the strong support of military dictatorship there. These kinds of things have hurt us very much. I would restore the concept of the fireside chat, which was an integral part of the administration of Franklin Roosevelt. And I would also restore the involvement of the Congress. When Harry Truman was president he was not afraid to have a strong secretary of defense. Dean Acheson, George Marshall were strong secretaries of uh – state – excuse me – state. But he also made sure that there was a bipartisan support. The members of Congress, Arthur Vandenberg, Walter George, were part of the process, and before our nation made a secret agreement, or before we made a bluffing statement, we were sure that we had the backing not only of the president and the secretary of state, but also of the Congress and the people. This is a responsibility of the president. And I think it’s very damaging to our country for Mr. Ford to have turned over this responsibility to the secretary of state. Well, in the first place, I’m not criticizing His Holiness the Pope. I was talking about Mr. Ford. The uh – fact is that secrecy has surrounded the decisions made by the Ford administration. In the case of the Helsinki agreement – it may have been a good agreement at the beginning, but we have failed to enforce the so-called basket three part, which insures the right of people to migrate, to join their families, to be free, to speak out. The Soviet Union is still jamming Radio Free Europe – Radio – uh- uh – Radio Free Europe is being jammed. We’ve also seen a very serious uh – problem with the so-called Sonnenfeldt document, which apparently Mr. Ford has just endorsed, which said that there’s an organic linkage between the Eastern European countries and the Soviet Union. And I would like to see Mr. Ford convince the Polish-Americans and the Czech-Americans and the Hungarian-Americans in this country that those countries don’t live under the domination and supervision of the Soviet Union behind the Iron – uh – Curtain. We also have seen Mr. Ford exclude himself from access to the public. He hasn’t had a tough cross-examination-type press conference in over thirty days. One press conference he had without sound. He’s also shown a weakness in yielding to pressure. The Soviet Union, for instance, put pressure on Mr. Ford and he refused to see a symbol of human freedom recognized around the world, Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn. The Arabs have put pressure on Mr. Ford, and he’s yielded, and has permitted a boycott by the Arab countries of American businesses who trade with Israel, or who have American Jews owning or taking part in the management of American – companies. His own secretary of commerce had to be subpoenaed by the Congress to reveal the names of businesses who were subject to this boycott. They didn’t volunteer the information. He had to be subpoenaed. And the last thing I’d like to say is this: This grain deal with the Soviet Union in ’72 was terrible, and Mr. Ford made up for it with three embargoes, one against our own ally in Japan. That’s not the way to run our foreign policy, including international trade. I would never single out food as a trade embargo item. If I ever decided to impose an embargo because of a crisis in international relationships, it would include all shipments of all equipment. For instance, if the Arab countries ever again declare an embargo against our nation on oil I would consider that not a military but an economic declaration of war, and I would respond instantly and in kind. I would not ship that Arab country anything – no weapons, no spare parts for weapons, no oil-drilling rigs, no oil pipe, no nothing. I wouldn’t single out just food. Another thing that I’d like to say is this: In our international trade, as I said in my op- opening statement, we have become the arms merchant of the world. When this Republican administration came into office we were shipping about $1 billion worth of arms overseas, now ten to twelve billion dollars worth of arms overseas to countries that quite often use these weapons to fight each other. The shift in emphasis has been very disturbing to me, speaking about the Middle East. Under the last Democratic administration 60 percent of all weapons that went into the Middle East were for Israel. Nowadays – 75 percent were for Israel before. Now 60 percent go to the Arab countries, and this does not include Iran. If you include Iran, our present shipment of weapons to the Middle East, only 20 percent goes to Israel. This is a deviation from idealism; it’s a deviation from a commitment to our major ally in the Middle East, which is Israel; it’s a yielding to economic pressure on the part of the Arabs on the oil issue; and it’s also a tremendous indication that under the Ford administration we have not addressed the energy policy adequately. We still have no comprehensive energy policy in this country. And it’s an overall sign of weakness. When we are weak at home economically – high unemployment, high inflation, a confused government, a wasteful defense establishment, this encourages the kind of pressure that’s been put on us successfully. It would’ve been inconceivable ten – fifteen years ago, for us to be brought to our knees with an Arab oil embargo. But it was done three years ago and they’re still putting pressure on us from the Arab countries to our discredit around the world. These are the weaknesses that I see, and I believe it’s not just a matter of idealism. It’s a matter of being tough. It’s a matter of being strong. It’s a matter of being consistent. Our priorities ought to be first of all to meet our own military needs, secondly to meet the needs of our allies and friends, and only then should we ship military equipment to foreign countries. As a matter of fact, Iran is gonna get eighty F-14s before we even meet our own Air Force orders for F-l4s. And the shipment of Spruance-class destroyers to Iran are much more highly sophisticated than the Spruance-class destroyers that are present being delivered to our own Navy. This is ridiculous and it ought to be changed. If – Iran is not an Arab country, as you know, it is a Moslem country – but if Saudi Arabia should declare an oil embargo against us, then I would consider that an economic declaration of war. And I would make sure that the uh – Saudis understood this ahead of time so there would be no doubt in their mind. I think under those circumstances they would refrain from pushing us to our knees as they did in 1973 with their previous oil embargo. Well, I’d like to go back just one moment to the previous question, where uh – Mr. Ford, I think, confused the issue by trying to say that we are shipping Israel 40 percent of our aid. As a matter of fact, during this current year uh we are shipping Iran, or have contracted to ship to Iran, about seven and a half billion dollars worth of arms and also to Saudi Arabia, about seven and a half billion dollars worth of arms. Also in 1975, we almost brought Israel to their knees after the uh – Yom Kippur War by the so-called reassessment of our relationship to Israel. We in effect tried to make Israel the scapegoat for the problems in the Middle East. And this weakened our relationships with Israel a great deal and put a cloud on the total commitment that our people feel toward the Israelis. There ought to be a clear, unequivocal commitment without change to Israel. In the Far East I think we need to continue to be uh – strong and uh – I would certainly uh – pursue the uh – normalization of uh – relationships with the People’s Republic of China. We opened a great opportunity in l972, which has pretty well been frittered – frit- frittered away under Mr. Ford, that ought to be a constant uh – inclination toward – uh – toward friendship. But I would never let that friendship with the People’s Republic of China stand in the way of the preservation of the independence and freedom of the people on Taiwan. Well, always in the past we’ve had an ability to have a strong defense and also have – to have a strong uh – domestic economy, and also to be strong in our reputation and influence within the community of nations. These uh – characteristics of our country have been endangered under Mr. Ford. We’re no longer respected in a showdown vote in the United Nations or in – in any other international council we’re lucky to get 20 percent of the other nations to vote with us. Our allies feel that we’ve neglected them. The so-called Nixon shock against Japan had weakened our relationships there. Under this administration we’ve also had an inclination to keep separate the European countries, thinking that if they are separate, then we can dominate them and proceed with our secret, Lone Ranger-type diplomatic efforts. I would uh – also like to point out that we, in this country, have let our economy go down the drain. The worst inflation since the Great Depression. The highest unemployment of any developed nation of the world. We have a higher unemployment rate in this country than Great Britain, and West Germany. Our unemployment rate is twice as high as it is in Italy; it’s three or four times as high as it is – as it is in Japan. And that terrible circumstance in this country is exported overseas. We comprise about 30 percent of the world’s economic trade power influence. And when we’re weak at home – weaker than all our allies – that weakness weakens the whole free world. So strong economy is very important. Another thing that we need to do is to reestablish the good relationships that we ought to have between the United States and our natural allies and friends. They have felt neglected. And using that base of strength, and using the idealism, the honesty, the predictability, the commitment, the integrity of our own country, that’s where our strength lies. And that would permit us to deal with the developing nations in a position of strength. Under this administration we’ve had a continuation of the so-called balance of power politics, where everything is looked on as a struggle between us on the one side, the Soviet Union on the other. Our allies – the smaller countries get trampled in the rush. What we need is to try to seek individualized bilateral relationships with countries, regardless of their size, and to establish world-order politics, which means that we want to preserve peace through strength. We also wanna revert back to the stature and the respect that our country had in previous administrations. Now, I can’t say when this can come. But I can guarantee it will not come if Gerald Ford is reelected and this present policy is continued; it will come if I’m elected. Well let me say very quickly that under President Johnson, in spite of the massive investment in the Vietnam War, he turned over a balanced budget to Mr. Nixon. The unemployment rate was less than 4 percent. The inflation rate under Kennedy and Johnson was about 2 percent – one-third what it is under this administration. So we did have at that time with good management, the ability to do both. I don’t think that anybody can say that Johnson and Kennedy neglected the poor and the destitute people in this country or around the world. But I can say this: The number one responsibility of any president, above all else, is to guarantee the security of our nation – an ability to be free of the threat of attack, or blackmail and to carry out our obligations to our allies and friends, and to carry out a legitimate foreign policy. They must go hand in hand, but the security of this nation has got to come first. Well, Mr. Ford acts like he’s uh – running for president for the first time. He’s been in office two years, and there has been absolutely no progress made toward a new SALT agreement. He has learned the date of the expiration of SALT I, apparently. We’ve seen, in this world, a development of a tremendous threat to us. As a nuclear engineer myself, I know the limitations and capabilities of atomic power. I also – know that as far as the human beings on this earth are concerned that the nonproliferation of atomic weapons is number one. Only the last few days with the election approaching, has Mr. Ford taken any interest in a nonproliferation movement. I advocated last May in a speech at the United Nations that we move immediately as a nation to declare a complete moratorium on the testing of all nuclear devices, both weapons and peaceful devices; that we not ship any more atomic fuel to a country that refuses to comply with strict controls over the waste which can be reprocessed into explosives. I’ve also advocated that we stop the sale by Germany and France of – processing plants for Pakistan and Brazil. Mr. Ford hasn’t moved on this. We also need to provide an adequate supply of enriched uranium. Mr. Ford, again, under pressure from the atomic energy lobby, has insisted that this reprocessing or rather re-en- enrichment be done by private industry and not by the existing uh – government uh – plants. This kind of confusion and absence of leadership has let us drift now for two years with a constantly increasing threat of atomic weapons throughout the world. We now have five nations that have atomic bombs that we know about. If we continue under Mr. Ford’s policy by 1985 or ’90 we’ll have twenty nations that have the capability of exploding atomic weapons. This has got to be stopped. That is one of the major challenges and major undertakings that I will assume as the next president. No, it’s not just campaign rhetoric. I think that militarily we are as strong as any nation on earth. I think we got to stay that way and continue to increase our capabilities to meet any potential threat. But as far as strength derived from commitment to principles, as far as strength derived from the unity within our country, as far as strength derived from the people, the Congress, the secretary of state, the president, sharing in the evolution and carrying-out of a foreign policy, as far as strength derived from the respect of our own allies and friends, their assurance that we will be staunch in our commitment, that we will not deviate and that we’ll give them adequate attention, as far as – as strength derived from doing what’s right – caring for the poor, providing food, becoming the breadbasket of the world instead of the arms merchant of the world – in those respects, we’re not strong. Also, we’ll never be strong again overseas, unless we’re strong at home. And with our economy in such terrible disarray and getting worse by the month. We’ve got five-hundred thousand more Americans unemployed today than we had three months ago. We’ve got two and a half million more Americans out of work now than we had when Mr. Ford took office. This kind of deterioration in our economic strength is bound to weaken us around the world. And we not only have uh problems at home but we export those problems overseas. So as far as the respect of our own people toward our own government, as far as participating in the shaping of uh – concepts and commitments, as far as the trust of our country among the nations of the world, as far as dependence of our country in meeting the needs and obligations that we’ve expressed to our allies, as far as the respect of our country – even among our potential adversaries – we are weak. Potentially we’re strong. Under this administration that strength has not been realized. I notice that Mr. Ford didn’t comment on the uh – prisons in Chile. This is an – a typical example, maybe of many others, where this administration overthrew an elected government and helped to establish a military dictatorship. This has not been an ancient history story. Last year under Mr. Ford, of all the Food for Peace that went to South America, 85 percent went to the military dictatorship in Chile. Another point I wanna make is this. He says we have to move from one area of the world to another. That’s one of the problems with this administration’s so-called shuttle diplomacy. While the secretary of state’s in one country, there are almost a hundred and fifty others that are wondering what we’re gonna do next, what will be the next secret agreement. We don’t have a comprehensive understandable foreign policy that deals with world problems or even regional problems. Another thing that concerned me was what Mr. Ford said about unemployment, that – insinuating that under Johnson and Kennedy that unemployment could only be held down when this country is at war. Karl Marx said that the free enterprise system in a democracy can only continue to exist when they are at war or preparing far war. Karl Marx was the grandfather of Communism. I don’t agree with that statement. I hope Mr. Ford doesn’t either. He has put pressure on the Congress – and I don’t believe Mr. Ford would even deny this – to hold up on nonproliferation legislation until the Congress agreed for an $8 billion program for private industry to start producing enriched uranium. And the last thing I wanna make is this. He talks about peace and I’m thankful for peace. We were peaceful when Mr. Ford went into office. But he and Mr. Kissinger and others tried to start a new Vietnam in Angola, and it was only the outcry of the American people and the Congress when their secret deal was discovered that prevented our involvement in that conflagration which was taking place there. Well, here again, uh – the Panamanian question is one that’s been confused by Mr. Ford. Uh – he had directed his uh – diplomatic relation – uh – uh – representative to yield to the Panamanians full sovereignty over the Panama Canal Zone at the end of a certain period of time. When Mr. Reagan raised this uh – question in Florida uh – Mr. Ford not only disavowed his instructions, but he also even dropped, parenthetically, the use of the word “detente.” I would never give up complete control or practical control of the Panama Canal Zone, but I would continue to negotiate with the Panamanians. When the original treaty was signed back in the early 1900s, when Theodore Roosevelt was president, Panama retained sovereignty over the Panama Canal Zone. We retained control as though we had sovereignty. Now I would be willing to go ahead with negotiations. I believe that we could share more fully responsibilities for the Panama Canal Zone with Panama. I would be willing to continue to raise the payment for shipment of goods through the Panama Canal Zone. I might even be willing to reduce to some degree our military emplacements in the Panama Canal Zane, but I would not relinquish practical control of the Panama Canal Zane any time in the foreseeable future. Well, I’m reluctant to uh comment on the recent report – I haven’t read it. I think the American people have only one – uh requirement – that the facts about Mayaguez be given to them accurately and completely. Mr. Ford has been there for eighteen months. He had the facts that were released today immediately after the Mayaguez incident. I understand that the report today is accurate. Mr. Ford has said, I believe, that it was accurate, and that the White House made no attempt to block the issuing of that report. I don’t know if that’s exactly accurate or not. I understand that both the – the uh – Department of State and the Defense Department have approved the accuracy of today’s report, or yesterday’s report, and also the National Security Agency. I don’t know what was right, or what was wrong, or what was done. The only thing I believe is that whatever the – the knowledge was that Mr. Ford had should have been given to the American people eighteen months ago, immediately after the Mayaguez uh – incident occurred. This is uh – what the American people want. When something happens that endangers our security, or when something happens that threatens our stature in the world, or when American people are endangered by the actions of a foreign country, uh – just forty uh sailors on the Mayaguez, we obviously have to move aggressively and quickly to rescue them. But then after the immediate action is taken, I believe the president has an obligation to tell the American people the truth and not wait eighteen months later for the report to be issued. I believe that the boycott of American businesses by the Arab countries because those businesses trade with Israel or because they have American Jews who are owners or directors in the company is an absolute disgrace. This is the first time that I’ve – remember in the history of our country when we’ve let a foreign country circumvent or change our Bill of Rights. I’ll do everything I can as president to stop the boycott of American businesses by the Arab countries. It’s not a matter of diplomacy or trade with me. It’s a matter of morality. And I don’t believe that Arab countries will pursue it when we have a strong president who will protect the integrity of our country, the commitment of our Constitution and Bill of Rights and protect people in this country who happen to be Jews. It may later be Catholics; it may be – later be Baptists who are threatened by some foreign country. But we ought to stand staunch. And I think it’s a disgrace that so far Mr. Ford’s administration has blocked the passage of legislation that would’ve revealed by law every instance of the boycott and it would’ve prevented the boycott from continuing. One of the uh – most embarrassing uh – failures of the Ford administration, and one that touches specifically on human rights, is his refusal to appoint a presidential commission to go to Vietnam, to go to Laos, to go to Cambodia and try to trade for the release of information about those who are missing in action in those wars. This is what the families of MIAs want. So far, Mr. Ford has not done it. We’ve had several fragmentary efforts by members of the Congress and by – by private citizens. Several months ago the Vietnam government said, “We are ready to sit down and negotiate for release of information on MIAs. So far, Mr. Ford has not responded. I would never normalize relationships with Vietnam, nor permit them to join the United Nations until they’ve taken this action. But that’s not enough. We need to have an active and aggressive action on the part of the president, the leader of his country, to seek out every possible way to get that information which has kept the MIA families in despair and doubt, and Mr. Ford has just not done it. The purpose of this debate and the outcome of the election will determine three basic things: Leadership, upholding the principles of our country, and proper priorities and commitments for the future. This election will also determine what kind of world we leave our children. Will it be a nightmare world threatened with the proliferation of atomic bombs, not just in five major countries but dozens of smaller countries that have been permitted to develop atomic weapons because of a failure of our top leadership to stop proliferation? Will we have a world of hunger and – and hatred, and will we be living in an armed camp stripped of our friendship and allies hiding behind a tight defense that’s been drawn in around us because we are fearful of the outside world? Will we have a government of secrecy that excludes the American people from participation in making basic decisions and therefore covers up mistakes and makes it possible for our government – our government – to depart from the principles of our Constitution and Bill of Rights? Or will we have a world of peace with the threat of atomic weapons eliminated, with full trade, with our people at work, inflation controlled, openness in government, our people proud once again, Congress, citizens, president, secretary of state working in harmony and unity toward a common future? Or world where people have enough to eat and a world where we care about those who don’t? Can we become a breadbasket of the world instead of the arms merchant of the world? I believe we can and we ought to. Now we’ve been hurt in recent years in this country. In the aftermath of Vietnam, Cambodia, Chile, Pakistan, Angola, Watergate, CIA, we’ve been hurt. Our people feel that we’ve lost something precious. That’s not necessary. I wanna see our nation – return to a posture and an image and a standard to make us proud once again. I remember the world with NATO, and the world of Point Four, and the world of the Marshall Plan, and the world of the Peace Corps. Why can’t we have that once again? We ought to be a beacon for nations who search for peace and who search for freedom, who search for individual liberty, who search for basic human rights. We haven’t been lately. We can be once again. We’ll never have that world leadership until we are strong at home, and we can have that strength if we return to the basic principles. It ought not to be a strength of bombast and threats. It ought to be a quiet strength based on the integrity of our people, the vision of the Constitution, an in- innate strong will and purpose that God’s given us in the greatest nation on earth – the United States. Well I might say first of all that I think in case of the Carter administration the sacrifices would be much less. Mr. Ford’s own uh – environmental agency has projected a 10 percent unemployment rate by 1978 if he’s uh – president. The American people are ready to make sacrifices if they are part of the process. If they know that they will be helping to make decisions and won’t be excluded from being an involved party to the national purpose. The major effort we must put forward is to put our people back to work. And I think that this uh – is one example where uh – a lot of people have selfish, grasping ideas now. I remember 1973 in the depth of the uh – energy crisis when President Nixon called on the American people to make a sacrifice, to cut down on the waste of uh – gasoline, to cut down on the uh – speed of automobiles. It was a – a tremendous surge of patriotism, that “I want to make a sacrifice for my country.” I think we uh – could call together, with strong leadership in the White House, business, industry and labor, and say let’s have voluntary price restraints. Let’s lay down some guidelines so we don’t have continuing inflation. We can also have a- an end to the extremes. We now have one extreme for instance, of some welfare recipients, who by taking advantage of the welfare laws, the housing laws, the uh – Medicaid uh – laws, and the uh – food stamp laws, make over $10 thousand a year and uh – they don’t have to pay any taxes on it. At the other extreme, uh – just 1 percent of the richest people in our country derive 25 percent of all the tax benefits. So both those extremes grasp for advantage and the person who has to pay that expense is the middle-income family who’s still working for a living and they have to pay for the rich who have privilege, and for the poor who are not working. But I think uh – uh – a balanced approach, with everybody being part of it and a striving for unselfishness, could help as it did in 1973 to let people sacrifice for their own country. I know I’m ready for it. I think the American people are too. I think the major reason for a decrease in participation that we have experienced ever since 1960 has been the deep discouragement of the American people about the performance of public officials. When you’ve got seven and a half, eight million people out of work, and you’ve got three times as much inflation as you had during the last eight-year Democratic administration, when you have the highest deficits in history; when you have it uh – becoming increasingly difficult far a family to put a child through college or to own a home, there’s a natural inclination to be turned off. Also, in the aftermath of Vietnam and Cambodia and uh – Watergate and uh – the CIA revelations, people have feel – have felt that they’ve uh been betrayed by public officials, I have to admit that in the uh – heat of the campaign – I’ve been in thirty primaries during the springtime, I’ve been campaigning for twenty-two months – I’ve made some mistakes. And I think this is uh – uh – part of uh – of just being a human being. I – I have to say that my campaign has been an open one. And uh – the Playboy thing has been of great – very great concern to me. I don’t know how to deal with it exactly. Uh – I uh – agreed to give the interview uh – to Playboy Other people have done it who are notable – uh – Governor Jerry Brown, uh – Walter Cronkite, uh – Albert Schweitzer, Mr. Ford’s own secretary of the treasury, Mr. Simon, uh – William Buckley – many other people. But they weren’t running for president, and in retrospect, from hindsight, I would not have given that uh – interview had I do it – had it – I to do it over again. If I should ever decide in the future to discuss my – my deep Christian beliefs and uh – condemnation and sinfulness, I’ll use another forum besides Playboy. But I can say this, uh – I’m doing the best I can to get away from that, and during the next ten days, the American people will not see the Carter campaign running uh – television advertisements and newspaper advertisements based on a personal attack on President Ford’s character. I believe that the opposite is true with President Ford’s campaign, and uh – I hope that we can leave those issues in this next ten days about personalities and mistakes of the past – we’ve both made some mistakes – and talk about unemployment, inflation, housing, education, taxation, government organization, stripping away of secrecy, and the things that are crucial to the American people. I regret the things in my own long campaign that have been mistaken, but I’m trying to do away with those the last ten days. I don’t have a response. In the last uh – two weeks, I’ve had a chance to talk to uh – two men who have visited uh – the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia and China. One is Governor Avell- Averell Harriman, who visited the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia, and the other is James Schlesinger, whom I think you accompanied to uh – China. I got a- a complete report back from those countries from these two distinguished – uh – gentlemen. Mr. Harriman talked to the leaders in Yugoslavia, and I think it’s accurate to say that there is no uh – prospect in their opinion, of the Soviet Union invading uh – Yugoslavia should uh – Mr. Tito pass away. The present leadership uh – there is uh – is fairly uniform in – in their purpose, and I think it’s a close-knit group, uh – and uh – I think it would be unwise for us to say that we will go to war uh – in Yugoslavia uh – if the Soviets should invade, which I think would be an extremely unlikely thing. I have maintained from the very beginning of my campaign, and this was a standard answer that I made in response to the Yugoslavian question, that I would never uh – go to war or become militarily involved, in the internal affairs of another country unless our own security was direc- rectly threatened. And uh – I don’t believe that our security would be directly threatened if the Soviet Union went uh – into Yugoslavia. I don’t believe it will happen. I certainly hope it won’t. I would take eh – the strongest possible measures short of uh – actual military uh – action there by our own troops, but I doubt that that would be an eventuality. No, I did not. Well, just briefly, I – I think this is uh – the second time that General Brown has made a statement that – for which he did have to apologize. And I know that everybody uh – makes mistakes. I think the first one was related to uh – the unwarranted influence of American Jews on the media and uh – in the Congress. This one concerned uh – Great Britain. I think he said that Israel was a – a military burden on us and that Iran hoped to reestablish the Persian Empire. Ah – I’m not uh – sure that I remembered earlier that President Ford had – had expressed uh – his concern about the statement or apologized for it. This is uh – something, though, that I think uh – is indicative of the need among the American people to know how its commander-in-chief, the president, feels and – and – and I think the only criticism that I would have uh – on – of Mr. Ford is that uh – immediately when the statement was re – re – revealed, uh – perhaps a – a statement from the president would have been a clarifying and a very beneficial thing. I don’t believe it does. Uh – I began campaigning uh – twenty-two months ago. At that time, nobody thought I had a chance to win. Uh – very few people knew who I was. I came from a tiny town, as you know, Plains, and didn’t hold public office, didn’t have very much money. And my first organization was just four or five people plus my wife and my children, my three sons and their wives. And we won the nomination by going out into the streets – barbershops, beauty parlors, restaurants, stores, in factory shift lines also in farmers’ markets and livestock sale barns – and we talked a lot and we listened a lot and we learned from the American people. And we built up uh – an awareness among the uh – voters of this country, particularly those in whose primaries I entered – thirty of them, nobody’s ever done that before – about who I was and what I stood for. Now we have a very, very wide-ranging group of advisers who help me prepare for these debates and who teach me about international economics, and foreign affairs, defense matters, health, education, welfare, government reorganization. I’d say, several hundred of them. And they’re very fine and very highly qualified. The one major decision that I have made since acquiring the nomination, and I share this with President Ford, is the choice of a vice president. I think this should be indicative of the kind of leaders I would choose to help me if I am elected. I chose Senator Walter Mondale. And the only criterion I ever put forward in my own mind was who among the several million people in this country would be the best person qualified to be president, if something should happen to me and to join me in being vice president if I should serve out my term. And I’m convinced now, more than I was when I got the nomination, that Walter Mondale was the right choice, And I believe this is a good indication of the kind of people I would choose in the future. Mr. Ford has had that same choice to make. I don’t want to say anything critical of Senator Dole, but I’ve never heard Mr. Ford say that that was his prim- primary consideration – Who is the best person I could choose in this country to be president of the United States? I feel completely at ease knowing that someday Senator Mondale might very well be president. In the last five pres- vice presidential uh – nominees, uh – incumbents, three of them have become president. But I think this is indicative of what I would do. Well, I might say that I think the League of Conservation Voters is absolutely right. This uh – administration’s record on environment is very bad. Uh – I think it’s accurate to say that the uh – strip-mining law which was passed twice by the Congress – uh – and was only like two votes I believe of being overridden – would have been good for the country. The claim that it would have put hundred and forty thousand miners out of work is uh – hard to believe, when at the time Mr. Ford vetoed it, the United Mine Workers was uh – supporting the bill. And I don’t think they would have supported the uh – bill had they known that they would lose a hundred and forty thousand jobs. There’s been a consistent policy on the part of this administration to lower or delay enforcement of air pollution standards and water pollution standards. And under both President Nixon and Ford, monies have been impounded that would’ve gone to uh – cities and others to control uh – water pollution. We have no energy policy. We, I think, are the only developed nation in the world that has no comprehensive energy policy, to permit us to plan in an orderly way how to shift from increasing the scarce uh – energy uh – forms: oil, and have research and development concentrated on the increased use of coal, which I strongly favor. The research and development to be used primary to make the coal burning uh – be clean. We need a heritage trust program, similar to the one we had in Georgia, to set aside additional lands that have uh – geological and archeological importance, uh natural areas for enjoyment. Uh – the lands that Mr. Ford uh – brags about having approved are in Alaska and they are enormous in uh – in size. But as far as the accessibility of them by the American people, it’s very uh – far in the future. We’ve taken no strong position in the uh – control of pollution of our oceans, and I would say the worst uh – threat to the environment of all is nuclear proliferation. And this administration, having been in office now for two years or more, has still not taken strong and bold action to stop the proliferation of nuclear waste around the world, particularly plutonium. Those are some brief remarks about the failures of this administration. I would do the opposite in every respect. Yes, I’d be glad to. In the first place, uh – as is the case with the environmental policy and the energy policy that I just described, and the policy for nonproliferation of uh – of nuclear waste, this administration has no urban policy. It’s impossible for mayors or governors to cooperate with the resident, because they can’t anticipate what’s gonna happen next. A mayor of a city like New York, for instance, needs to know uh – eighteen months or two years ahead of time what responsibility the city will have in administration and in financing – in things like housing, uh – pollution control, uh – crime control, education, welfare and health. This has not been done, unfortunately. I remember the headline in the Daily News that said, “Ford to New York: Drop Dead.” I think it’s very important that our cities know that they have a partner in the federal government. Quite often Congress has passed laws in the past designed to help people with uh – the ownership of homes and with the control of crime and with adequate health care and education programs and so forth. Uh – those uh programs were designed to help those who need it most. And quite often this has been in the very poor people and neighborhoods in the downtown urban centers. Because of the uh – great -ly- greatly uh – advantaged uh – tho- per – persons who live in the suburbs, better education, better organization, more articulate, more aware of what the laws are, quite often this money has been channeled out of the downtown centers where it’s needed. Also I favor all revenue sharing money being used for local governments, and also to remove prohibitions in the use of revenue sharing money so that it can be used to improve education, and health care. We have now uh – for instance only 7 percent of the total education cost being financed by the federal government. When uh – the Nixon-Ford Administration started, this was 10 percent. That’s a 30 percent reduction in the portion that the federal government contributes to education in just eight years. And as you know, the education cost has gone up uh – tremendously. The last point is that the major – uh thrust has gotta be to put people back to work. We’ve got an extraordinarily high unemployment rate among downtown urban ghetto areas, uh – particularly among the very poor and particularly among minority groups, sometimes 50 or 60 percent. And the concentration of employment opportunities in those areas would help greatly not only to reestablish the tax base, but also to help reduce the extraordinary welfare cost. One of the major responsibilities on the shoulders of uh – New York City is to – is to finance welfare. And I favor a shifting of the welfare cost away from the local governments altogether. And over a longer period of time, let the federal government begin to absorb part of it that’s now paid by the state governments. Those things would help a great deal with the cities, but we still have a – a very serious problem there. The uh – description just made of this administration’s record is hard to uh – recognize. I think it’s accurate to say that Mr. Ford voted against the uh – Voting Rights Acts and the uh – Civil Rights Acts in their uh – debative stage I think once it was assured they were going to pass he finally voted for it. This country uh – changed drastically in 1969 when the uh – terms of John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson were over and Richard Nixon and – and Gerald Ford became the presidents. There was a time when there was hope for those who uh – were poor and downtrodden and who were – uh elderly or who were – uh ill or who were in minority groups, but that time has been gone. I think the greatest thing that ever happened to the South was the passage of the Civil Rights Act and the opening up of opportunities – uh to black people – the chance to vote, to hold a job, to buy a house, to go to school, and to participate in public affairs. It not only liberated – uh black people but it also liberated the whites. We’ve seen uh – in many instances in recent years a minority affairs uh – section of uh Small Loan Administration, uh – Small Business Administration lend uh – a black entrepreneur just enough money to get started, and then to go bankrupt. The bankruptcies have gone up – uh in an extraordinary degree. Uh – FHA, which used to be a very responsible agency, uh – that everyone looked to to help own a home, lost six million dollars last year. There’ve been over thirteen hundred indictments in HUD, over eight hundred convictions relating just to home loans. And now the federal government has become the world’s greatest slum landlord. We’ve got a 30 percent or 40 percent unemployment rate among minority uh – young people. And there’s been no concerted effort given to the needs of those who are both poor and black, or poor and who speak a foreign language. And that’s where there’s been a great uh generation of despair, and ill health, and the lack of education, lack of purposefulness, and the lack of hope for the future. But it doesn’t take just a quiet uh – dormant uh minimum enforcement of the law. It requires an aggressive searching out and reaching out to help people who especially need it. And that’s been lacking in the last eight years. I would not work hard to support any of those. Uh – we’ve always had, I think, a lot of constitutional amendments proposed, but the passage of them has been uh – fairly slow, and uh – few and far between. In the two-hundred-year history there’s been a very uh – cautious approach to this. We – quite often we have a transient problem. I – I’m strongly against a- abortion. I think abortion’s wrong. I don’t think the government oughta do anything to encourage abortion. But I don’t favor a constitutional amendment on the subject. But short of the constitutional amendment, and within the confines of the Supreme Court rulings, I’ll do everything I can to minimize the need for abortions with better sex education, family planning, with better adoptive procedures. I personally don’t believe that the federal government oughta finance abortions, but I – I draw the line and don’t support a constitutional amendment. However, I honor the right of people who seek the constitutional amendments on school busing, on uh – prayer in the schools and an abortion. But among those you named, I won’t actively work for the passage of any of them. I – I think it’s accurate to say that Mr. Ford’s position on gun control has changed. Uh – earlier, uh – Mr. Levi, his uh – attorney general, put forward a gun control proposal, which Mr. Ford later, I believe, espoused, that called for the prohibition against the uh sale aw- of the uh – so-called Saturday Night Specials. And it would’ve put uh – very strict uh – uh – control over who owned a handgun. I have been a hunter all my life and happen to own both shotguns, rifles, and a handgun. And uh – the only purpose that I would see in registering uh – handguns and not long guns of any kind would be to prohibit the uh – ownership of those guns by those who’ve used them in the commission of a crime, or who uh – have been proven to be mentally incompetent to own a gun. I believe that limited approach to the – to the question would be uh – advisable, and – and I think, adequate. But that’s as far as I would go with it. While I was governor of Georgia, although I’m not a lawyer, we had complete reform of the Georgia court system. We uh – streamlined the structure of the court, put in administrative officers, put a unified court system in, required that all uh – severe sentences be reviewed far uniformity. And, in addition to that put forward a proposal that was adopted and used throughout my own term of office of selection of – for all judges and district attorneys or prosecuting attorneys, on the basis of merit. Every time I had a vacancy on the Georgia Supreme Court – and I filled five of those vacancies out of seven total and about half the court of appeals judges, about 35 percent of the trial judges – I was given from an objective panel the five most highly qualified persons in Georgia. And from those five, I always chose the first one or second one. So merit selection of judges is the most important single criterion. And I would institute the same kind of procedure as president, not only in judicial appointments, but also in diplomatic appointments. Secondly, I think that the Burger Court has fairly well confirmed the major and – and most far-reaching and most controversial decisions of the Warren Court. Civil rights – uh has been confirmed by the Burger Court, hasn’t been uh – reversed, and I don’t think there’s any inclination to reverse those basic decisions. The one-man, one-vote rule, which is a very important one that uh – s- struck down the unwarranted influence in the legislature of parsley – uh populated areas of – of the states. The uh – right of indigent or very poor accused persons to uh – legal counsel. Uh – I think the Burger Court has confirmed that basic and very controversial decision of the Warren Court. Also the – the protection of an arrested person against unwarranted persecution in trying to get a false uh – confession. But now I think there have been a couple of instances where the Burger Court has made technical rulings where an obviously guilty person was later found to be guilty. And I think that in that case uh – some of the more liberal uh – members of the uh – so-called Warren Court agreed with those decisions. But the only uh – thing I uh – have pointed out was, what I’ve just said, and that there was a need to clarify the technicalities so that you couldn’t be forced to release a person who was obviously guilty just because of a – of a small technicality in the law. And – and that’s a reversal of position uh by the Burger Court with which I do agree. Okay, I thought I answered it by saying that it would be on the basis of merit. Once the uh – search and analysis procedure had been completed, and once I’m given a list of the five or seven or ten uh – best qualified persons in the country, I would make a selection from among those uh – persons. If the uh – list was, uh – in my opinion, fairly uniform, if there was no outstanding person, then I would undoubtedly choose someone who would most accurately reflect my own basic politi- political philosophy as best I could determine it. Which would be uh – to continue the progress that has been made under the last two uh – courts – the Warren Court and the Burger Court. I would also like to uh – completely revise our criminal justice system – to do some of the things at the federal level in court reform that I’ve just described, as has been done in Georgia and other states. And then I would like to appoint people who would be interested in helping with that. I know that uh Chief Justice Burger is. He hasn’t had help from the administration, from the Congress, to carry this out. The uh – emphasis, I think, of the – of the court system uh – should be to interpret the uh – the Constitution and the laws uh – equally between property protection and personal protection. But when there’s uh – a very narrow decision – which quite often there’s one that reaches the Supreme Court – I think the choice should be with human rights. And uh – that would be another factor that I would follow. With all due respect to President Ford, I think he ought to be ashamed of mentioning that statement, because we have the highest unemployment rate now than we had at any time between the Great Depression caused by Herbert Hoover and the time President Ford took office. We’ve got seven and a half million people out of jobs. Since he’s been in office, two and a half million more American people have lost their jobs. In the last four months alone, five hundred thousand Americans have gone on the unemployment roll. In the last month, we’ve had a net loss of one hundred and sixty-three thousand jobs. Anybody who says that the inflation rate is in good shape now ought to talk to the housewives. One of the overwhelming results that I’ve seen in the polls is that people feel that you can’t plan anymore. There’s no way to make a prediction that my family might be able to own a home or to put my kid through college. Savings accounts are losing money instead of gaining money. Inflation is robbing us. Under the present administration – Nixon’s and Ford’s – we’ve had three times the inflation rate that we experienced under President Johnson and President Kennedy. The economic growth is less than half today what it was at the beginning of this year. And housing starts – he compares the housing starts with last year. I don’t blame him, because in 1975 we had fewer housing starts in this country, fewer homes built, than any year since 1940. That’s thirty-five years. And we’ve got a 35 percent unemployment rate in many areas of this country among construction workers. And Mr. Ford hasn’t done anything about it. And I think this shows a callous indifference to the families that have suffered so much. He has vetoed bills passed by Congress within the congressional budget guidelines job opportunities for two million Americans. We’ll never have a balanced budget, we’ll never meet the needs of our people, we’ll never control the inflationary spiral, as long as we have seven and a half or eight million people out of work, who are looking for jobs. And we’ve probably got two and a half more million people who are not looking for jobs any more, because they’ve given up hope. That is a very serious indictment of this administration. It’s probably the worst one of all. Well, that’s not exactly an accurate description of what happened. When I was that far ahead, it was immediately following the Democratic Convention, and before the Republican Convention. At that time, uh – 25 or 30 percent of the Reagan supporters said that they would not support President Ford. But as occurred at the end of the con- Democratic Convention, the Republican Party unified itself. And I think immediately following the Republican Convention, there was about a ten-point spread. I believe that to be accurate, I had 49 percent; President Ford, 39 percent. Uh – the polls uh – are good indications of fluctuations, but they vary widely one from another. And the only poll I’ve ever followed is the one that uh – you know, is taken on election day. I was in uh – thirty primaries in the spring, and uh – at first it was obvious that I didn’t have any standing in the poll. As a matter of fact, I think when Gallup ran their first poll in December of 1975 they didn’t put my name on the list. They had thirty-five people on the list. My name wasn’t even there. And at the beginning of the year I had about 2 percent. So the polls to me are interesting, but they don’t determine, you know, my hopes or – or my despair. I campaign among people. I’ve never depended on powerful political figures to put me in office. I have a direct relationship with hundreds of people around – hundreds of thousands around the country who actively campaign for me. In Georgia alone, for instance, I got 84 percent of the vote, and I think there were fourteen people uh – in addition to myself on the ballot, and Governor Wallace had been very strong in Georgia. That’s an overwhelming support from my own people who know me best. And today, we have about five hundred Georgians at their own expense – just working people who believe in me – spread around the country uh – involved in the political campaign. So, the polls are interesting, but uh – I don’t know how to explain the fluctuation. I think a lot of it uh – depends on current events – uh – sometimes foreign affairs, sometimes domestic affairs. But I think our hold uh – of support among those who uh – are crucial to the election has been fairly steady. And my success in the primary season was, I think, notable for a newcomer, from someone who’s from outside Washington, who – who never has been a part of the Washington establishment. And I think that we’ll have good results uh – on November the second for myself and I hope for the country. Thank you Barbara (barely audible). The major purpose of an election for president is to choose a leader. Someone who can analyze the depths of feeling in our country to set a standard for our people to follow, to inspire our people to reach for greatness, to correct our defects, to answer difficult questions, to bind ourselves together in a spirit of unity. I don’t believe the present administration has done that. We have been discouraged and we’ve been alienated. Sometimes we’ve been embarrassed and sometimes we’ve been ashamed. Our people are out of work, and there’s a sense of withdrawal. But our country is innately very strong. Mr. Ford is a good and decent man, but he’s in – been in office now more than eight hundred days approaching almost as long as John Kennedy was in office. I’d like to ask the American people what, what’s been accomplished. A lot remains to be done. My own background is different from his. I was a school board member, and a library board member. I served an a hospital authority. And I was in the state senate and I was governor and I’m an engineer, a Naval officer, a farmer, a businessman. And I believe we require someone who can work harmoniously with the Congress, who can work closely with the people of this country, and who can bring a new image and a new spirit to Washington. Our tax structure is a disgrace, it needs to be reformed. I was Governor of Georgia for four years. We never increased sales taxes or income tax or property tax. As a matter of fact, the year before I went out of office we gave a $50 million refund to the property taxpayers of Georgia. We spend six hundred dollars per person in this country – every man, woman and child – for health care. We still rank fifteenth among all the nations of the world in infant mortality. And our cancer rate is uh – higher than any country in the world. We don’t have good health care. We could have it. Employment ought to be restored to our people. We’ve become almost a welfare state. We spend now 700 percent more on unemployment compensation than we did eight years ago when the Republicans took over the White House. Our people wanna go back to work. Our education system can be improved. Secrecy ought to be stripped away from government and a maximum of personal privacy ought to be maintained. Our housing programs have uh – gone bad. It used to be that the average – uh family could own a house. But now less than a third of our people can afford to buy their own homes. The budget was more grossly out of balance last year than ever before in the history of our country – $65 billion – primarily because our people are not at work. Inflation is robbing us, as we’ve already discussed, and the government bureaucracy is uh – just a horrible mess. This doesn’t have to be. Now I don’t know all the answers. Nobody could. But I do know that if the president of the United States and the Congress of the United States and the people of the United States said, “I believe our nation is greater than what we are now.” I believe that if we are inspired, if we can achieve a degree of unity, if we can set our goals high enough and work toward recognized goals with industry and labor and agriculture along with government at all levels, then we can achieve great things. We might have to do it slowly. There are no magic answers to do it. But I believe together we can make great progress. We can correct our difficult mistakes and answer those very tough questions. I believe in the greatness of our country, and I believe the American people are ready for a change in Washington. We’ve been drifting too long. We’ve been dormant too long. We’ve been discouraged too long. And we have not set an example for our own people. But I believe that we can now establish in the White House a good relationship with Congress, a good relationship with our people, set very high goals for our country. And with inspiration and hard work we can achieve great things. And let the world know – that’s very important. But more importantly, let the people in our own country realize that we still live in the greatest nation on earth. Thank you very much. Mr. Stone, I’ve had to make thousands of decisions since I’ve been President, serving in the Oval Office. And with each one of those decisions that affect the future of my country, I have learned in the process. I think I’m a much wiser and more experienced man than I was when I debated four years ago against President Ford. I’ve also learned that there are no simple answers to complicated questions. H. L. Mencken said that for every problem there’s a simple answer. It would be neat and plausible and wrong. The fact is that this nation, in the eight years before I became President, had its own military strength decreased. Seven out of eight years, the budget commitments for defense went down, 37% in all. Since I’ve been in office, we’ve had a steady, carefully planned, methodical but, very effective increase in our commitment for defense. But what we’ve done is use that enormous power and prestige and military strength of the United States to preserve the peace. We’ve not only kept peace for our own country, but we’ve been able to extend the benefits of peace to others. In the Middle East, we’ve worked for a peace treaty between Israel and Egypt, successfully, and have tied ourselves together with Israel and Egypt in a common defense capability. This is a very good step forward for our nation’s security, and we’ll continue to do as we have done in the past. I might also add that there are decisions that are made in the Oval Office by every President which are profound in nature. There are always trouble spots in the world, and how those troubled areas are addressed by a President alone in that Oval Office affects our nation directly, the involvement of the United States and also our American interests. That is a basic decision that has to be made so frequently, by every President who serves. That is what I have tried to do successfully by keeping our country at peace. Mr. Stone, in my State of the Union address earlier this year, I pointed out that any threat to the stability or security of the Persian Gulf would be a threat to the security of our own country. In the past, we have not had an adequate military presence in that region. Now we have two major carrier task forces. We have access to facilities in five different areas of that region. And we’ve made it clear that working with our allies and others, that we are prepared to address any foreseeable eventuality which might interrupt commerce with that crucial area of the world. But in doing this, we have made sure that we address this question peacefully, not injecting American military forces into combat, but letting the strength of our nation be felt in a beneficial way. This, I believe, has assured that our interests will be protected in the Persian Gulf region, as we have done in the Middle East and throughout the world. Well, there are various elements of defense. One is to control nuclear weapons, which I hope we’ll get to later on because that is the most important single issue in this campaign. Another one is how to address troubled areas of the world. I think, habitually, Governor Reagan has advocated the injection of military forces into troubled areas, when I and my predecessors – both Democrats and Republicans – have advocated resolving those troubles in those difficult areas of the world peacefully, diplomatically, and through negotiation. In addition to that, the build-up of military forces is good for our country because we’ve got to have military strength to preserve the peace. But I’ll always remember that the best weapons are the ones that are never fired in combat, and the best soldier is one who never has to lay his life down on the field of battle. Strength is imperative for peace, but the two must go hand in hand. Again it’s important to put the situation in perspective. In 1974, we had a so-called oil shock, wherein the price of OPEC oil was raised to an extraordinary degree. We had an even worse oil shock in 1979. In 1974, we had the worst recession, the deepest and most penetrating recession since the Second World War. The recession that resulted this time was the briefest since the Second World War. In addition, we’ve brought down inflation. Earlier this year, in the first quarter, we did have a very severe inflation pressure brought about by the OPEC price increase. It averaged about 18% in the first quarter of this year. In the second quarter, we had dropped it down to about 13%. The most recent figures, the last three months, on the third quarter of this year, the inflation rate is 7% – still too high, but it illustrates very vividly that in addition to providing an enormous number of jobs – nine million new jobs in the last three and a half years – that the inflationary threat is still urgent on us. I notice that Governor Reagan recently mentioned the Reagan-Kemp-Roth proposal. which his own running mate, George Bush, described as voodoo economics, and said that it would result in a 30% inflation rate. And Business Week, which is not a Democratic publication, said that this Reagan-Kemp-Roth proposal – and I quote them, I think – was completely irresponsible and would result in inflationary pressures which would destroy this nation. So our proposals are very sound and very carefully considered to stimulate jobs, to improve the industrial complex of this country, to create tools for American workers, and at the same time would be anti-inflationary in nature. So to add nine million new jobs, to control inflation, and to plan for the future with an energy policy now intact as a foundation is our plan for the years ahead. Yes. We have demanded that the American people sacrifice, and they have done very well. As a matter of fact, we’re importing today about one-third less oil from overseas than we did just a year ago. We’ve had a 25% reduction since the first year I was in office. At the same time, as I have said earlier, we have added about nine million net new jobs in that period of time – a record never before achieved. Also, the new energy policy has been predicated on two factors: One is conservation, which requires sacrifice, and the other one, increase in production of American energy, which is going along very well – more coal this year than ever before in American history, more oil and gas wells drilled this year than ever before in history. The new economic revitalization program that we have in mind, which will be implemented next year, would result in tax credits which would let business invest in new tools and new factories to create even more new jobs – about one million in the next two years. And we also have planned a youth employment program which would encompass 600,000 jobs for young people. This has already passed the House, and it has an excellent prospect to pass the Senate. Governor Reagan’s proposal, the Reagan-Kemp-Roth proposal, is one of the most highly inflationary ideas that ever has been presented to the American public. He would actually have to cut Government spending by at least $130 billion in order to balance the budget under this ridiculous proposal. I notice that his task force that is working for his future plans had some of their ideas revealed in The Wall Street Journal this week. One of those ideas was to repeal the minimum wage, and several times this year, Governor Reagan has said that the major cause of unemployment is the minimum wage. This is a heartless kind of approach to the working families of our country, which is typical of many Republican leaders of the past, but, I think, has been accentuated under Governor Reagan. In California – I’m surprised Governor Reagan brought this up – he had the three largest tax increases in the history of that state under his administration. He more than doubled state spending while he was Governor – 122% increase – and had between a 20% and 30% increase in the number of employees in California. Thank you, sir. Thank you, Mr. Hilliard. When I was campaigning in 1976, everywhere I went, the mayors and local officials were in despair about the rapidly deteriorating central cities of our nation. We initiated a very fine urban renewal program, working with the mayors, the governors, and other interested officials. This has been a very successful effort. That’s one of the main reasons that we’ve had such an increase in the number of people employed. Of the nine million people put to work in new jobs since I’ve been in office, 1.3 million of those has been among black Americans, and another million among those who speak Spanish. We now are planning to continue the revitalization program with increased commitments of rapid transit, mass transit. Under the windfall profits tax, we expect to spend about $43 billion in the next 10 years to rebuild the transportation systems of our country. We also are pursuing housing programs. We’ve had a 73% increase in the allotment of Federal funds for improved education. These are the kinds of efforts worked on a joint basis with community leaders, particularly in the minority areas of the central cities that have been deteriorating so rapidly in the past. It’s very important to us that this be done with the full involvement of minority citizens. I have brought into the top level, top levels of government, into the White House, into administrative offices of the Executive branch, into the judicial system, highly qualified black and Spanish citizens and women who in the past had been excluded. I noticed that Governor Reagan said that when he was a young man that there was no knowledge of a racial problem in this country. Those who suffered from discrimination because of race or sex certainly knew we had a racial problem. We have gone a long way toward correcting these problems, but we still have a long way to go. Ours is a nation of refugees, a nation of immigrants. Almost all of our citizens came here from other lands and now have hopes, which are being realized, for a better life, preserving their ethnic commitments, their family structures, their religious beliefs, preserving their relationships with their relatives in foreign countries, but still holding themselves together in a very coherent society, which gives our nation its strength. In the past, those minority groups have often been excluded from participation in the affairs of government. Since I’ve been President, I’ve appointed, for instance, more than twice as many black Federal judges as all previous presidents in the history of this country. I’ve done the same thing in the appointment of women, and also Spanish-speaking Americans. To involve them in the administration of government and the feeling that they belong to the societal structure that makes decisions in the judiciary and in the executive branch is a very important commitment which I am trying to realize and will continue to do so in the future. It’s obvious that we still have a long way to go in fully incorporating the minority groups into the mainstream of American life. We have made good progress, and there is no doubt in my mind that the commitment to unemployment compensation, the minimum wage, welfare, national health insurance, those kinds of commitments that have typified the Democratic party since ancient history in this country’s political life are a very important element of the future. In all those elements, Governor Reagan has repeatedly spoken out against them, which, to me, shows a very great insensitivity to giving deprived families a better chance in life. This, to me, is a very important difference between him and me in this election, and I believe the American people will judge accordingly. There is no doubt in my mind that in the downtown central cities, with the, with the new commitment on an energy policy, with a chance to revitalize homes and to make them more fuel efficient, with a chance for our synthetic fuels program, solar power, this will give us an additional opportunity for jobs which will pay rich dividends. Barbara, one of the blights on this world is the threat and the activities of terrorists. At one of the recent economic summit conferences between myself and the other leaders of the western world, we committed ourselves to take strong action against terrorism. Airplane hijacking was one of the elements of that commitment. There is no doubt that we have seen in recent years – in recent months – additional acts of violence against Jews in France and, of course, against those who live in Israel, by the PLO and other terrorist organizations. Ultimately, the most serious terrorist threat is if one of those radical nations, who believe in terrorism as a policy, should have atomic weapons. Both I and all my predecessors have had a deep commitment to controlling the proliferation of nuclear weapons. In countries like Libya or Iraq, we have even alienated some of our closest trade partners because we have insisted upon the control of the spread of nuclear weapons to those potentially terrorist countries. When Governor Reagan has been asked about that, he makes the very disturbing comment that non-proliferation, or the control of the spread of nuclear weapons, is none of our business. And recently when he was asked specifically about Iraq, he said there is nothing we can do about it. This ultimate terrorist threat is the most fearsome of all, and it’s part of a pattern where our country must stand firm to control terrorism of all kinds. We will maintain our position of neutrality in the Iran and Iraq war. We have no plans to sell additional materiel or goods to Iran, that might be of a warlike nature. When I made my decision to stop all trade with Iran as a result of the taking of our hostages, I announced then, and have consistently maintained since then, that if the hostages are released safely, we would make delivery on those items which Iran owns – which they have bought and paid for – also, that the frozen Iranian assets would be released. That’s been a consistent policy, one I intend to carry out. I didn’t hear any comment from Governor Reagan about what he would do to stop or reduce terrorism in the future. What the Western allies did decide to do is to stop all air flights – commercial air flights – to any nation involved in terrorism or the hijacking of air planes, or the harboring of hijackers. Secondly, we all committed ourselves, as have all my predecessors in the Oval Office not to permit the spread of nuclear weapons to a terrorist nation, or to any other nation that does not presently have those weapons or capabilities for explosives. Third, not to make any sales of materiel or weapons to a nation which is involved in terrorist activities. And, lastly, not to deal with the PLO until and unless the PLO recognizes Israel’s right to exist and recognizes UN Resolution 242 as a basis for Middle East peace. These are a few of the things to which our nation is committed, and we will continue with these commitments. Yes. Governor Reagan is making some very misleading and disturbing statements. He not only advocates the scrapping of this treaty – and I don’t know that these men that he quotes are against the treaty in its final form – but he also advocates the possibility, he said it’s been a missing element, of playing a trump card against the Soviet Union of a nuclear arms race, and is insisting upon nuclear superiority by our own nation, as a predication for negotiation in the future with the Soviet Union. If President Brezhnev said, we will scrap this treaty, negotiated under three American Presidents over a seven-year period of time, we insist upon nuclear superiority as a basis for future negotiations, and we believe that the launching of a nuclear arms race is a good basis for future negotiations, it’s obvious that I, as President, and all Americans, would reject such a proposition. This would mean the resumption of a very dangerous nuclear arms race. It would be very disturbing to American people. It would change the basic tone and commitment that our nation has experienced ever since the Second World War, with al Presidents, Democratic and Republican. And it would also be very disturbing to our allies, all of whom support this nuclear arms treaty. In addition to that, the adversarial relationship between ourselves and the Soviet Union would undoubtedly deteriorate very rapidly. This attitude is extremely dangerous and belligerent in its tone, although it’s said with a quiet voice. I think, to close out this discussion, it would be better to put into perspective what we’re talking about. I had a discussion with my daughter, Amy, the other day, before I came here, to ask her what the most important issue was. She said she thought nuclear weaponry – and the control of nuclear arms. This is a formidable force. Some of these weapons have 10 megatons of explosion. If you put 50 tons of TNT in each one of railroad cars, you would have a carload of TNT – a trainload of TNT stretching across this nation. That’s one major war explosion in a warhead. We have thousands, equivalent of megaton, or million tons, of TNT warheads. The control of these weapons is the single major responsibility of a President, and to cast out this commitment of all Presidents, because of some slight technicalities that can be corrected, is a very dangerous approach. I don’t think there’s any doubt that, in the future, the cost of oil is going to go up. What I’ve had as a basic commitment since I’ve been President is to reduce our dependence on foreign oil. It can only be done in two ways: one, to conserve energy – to stop the waste of energy – and, secondly, to produce more American energy. We’ve been very successful in both cases. We’ve now reduced the importing of foreign oil in the last year alone by one-third. We imported today 2 million barrels of oil less than we did the same date just a year ago. This commitment has been opening up a very bright vista for our nation in the future, because with the windfall profits tax as a base, we now have an opportunity to use American technology and American ability and American natural resources to expand rapidly the production of synthetic fuels, yes; to expand rapidly the production of solar energy, yes; and also to produce the traditional kinds of American energy. We will drill more oil and gas wells this year than any year in history. We’ll produce more coal this year than any year in history. We are exporting more coal this year than any year in history. And we have an opportunity now with improved transportation systems and improved loading facilities in our ports, to see a very good opportunity on a world international market, to replace OPEC oil with American coal as a basic energy source. This exciting future will not only give us more energy security, but will also open up vast opportunities for Americans to live a better life and to have millions of new jobs associated with this new and very dynamic industry now in prospect because of the new energy policy that we’ve put into effect. To repeat myself, we have this year the opportunity, which we’ll realize, to produce 800 million tons of coal – an unequaled record in the history of our country. Governor Reagan says that this is not a good achievement, and he blames restraints on coal production on regulations – regulations that affect the life and the health and safety of miners, and also regulations that protect the purity of our air and the quality our water and our land. We cannot cast aside these regulations. We have a chance in the next 15 years, insisting upon the health and safety of workers in the mines, and also preserving the same high air and water pollution standards, to triple the amount of coal we produce. Governor Reagan’s approach to our energy policy, which has already proven its effectiveness, is to repeal, or to change substantially, the windfall profits tax – to return a major portion of $227 billion back to the oil companies; to do away with the Department of Energy; to short-circuit our synthetic fuels program; to put a minimal emphasis on solar power; to emphasize strongly nuclear power plants as a major source of energy in the future. He wants to put all our eggs in one basket and give that basket to the major oil companies. Sure. As a matter of fact,. the air pollution standard laws that were passed in California were passed over the objections of Governor Reagan, and this is a very well-known fact. Also, recently, when someone suggested that the Occupational Safety and Health Act should be abolished, Governor Reagan responded, amen. The offshore drilling rights is a question that Governor Reagan raises often. As a matter of fact, in the proposal for the Alaska lands legislation, 100% of all the offshore lands would be open for exploration, and 95% of all the Alaska lands, where it is suspected or believed that minerals might exist. We have, with our five-year plan for the leasing of offshore lands, proposed more land to be drilled than has been opened up for drilling since this program first started in 1954. So we’re not putting restraints on American exploration, we’re encouraging it in every way we can. As long as there is a Democratic President in the White House, we will have a strong and viable Social Security System, free of the threat of bankruptcy. Although Governor Reagan has changed his position lately, on four different occasions, he has advocated making Social Security a voluntary system, which would, in effect, very quickly bankrupt it. I noticed also in The Wall Street Journal early this week, that a preliminary report of his task force advocates making Social Security more sound by reducing the adjustment in Social Security for the retired people to compensate for the impact of inflation. These kinds of approaches are very dangerous to the security, the well being and the peace of mind of the retired people of this country and those approaching retirement age. But no matter what it takes in the future to keep Social Security sound, it must be kept that way. And although there was a serious threat to the Social Security System and its integrity during the 1976 campaign and when I became President, the action of the Democratic Congress working with me has been to put Social Security back on a sound financial basis. That is the way it will stay. These constant suggestions that the basic Social Security System should be changed does call for concern and consternation among the aged of our country. It is obvious that we should have a commitment to them, that Social Security benefits should not be taxed and that there would be no peremptory change in the standards by which Social Security payments are made to retired people. We also need to continue to index Social Security payments, so that if inflation rises, the Social Security payments would rise a commensurate degree to let the buying power of a Social Security check continue intact. In the past, the relationship between Social Security and Medicare has been very important to providing some modicum of aid for senior citizens in the retention of health benefits. Governor Reagan, as a matter of fact, began his political career campaigning around this nation against Medicare. Now, we have an opportunity to move toward national health insurance, with an emphasis on the prevention of disease, an emphasis on out-patient care, not in-patient care; an emphasis on hospital cost containment to hold down the cost of hospital care far those who are ill, an emphasis on catastrophic health insurance, so that if a family is threatened with being wiped out economically because of a very high medical bill, then the insurance would help pay for it. These are the kinds of elements of a national health insurance, important to the American people. Governor Reagan, again, typically is against such a proposal. I think this debate on Social Security, Medicare, national health insurance typifies, as vividly any other subject tonight, the basic historical differences between the Democratic Party and Republican Party. The allusions to basic changes in the minimum wage is another, and the deleterious comments that Governor Reagan has made about unemployment compensation. These commitments that the Democratic Party has historically made to the working families of this nation have been extremely important to the growth in their stature and in a better quality of life for them. I noticed recently that Governor Reagan frequently quotes Democratic presidents in his acceptance address. I have never heard a candidate for President, who is a Republican, quote a Republican president, but when they get in office, they try to govern like Republicans. So, it is good fo the American people to remember that there is a sharp basic historical difference between Governor Reagan and me on these crucial issues – also, between the two parties that we represent. Barbara, reluctant as I am to say anything critical about Governor Reagan, I will try to answer your question. First of all, there is the historical perspective that I just described. This is a contest between a Democrat in the mainstream of my party, as exemplified by the actions that I have taken in the Oval Office the last four years, as contrasted with Governor Reagan, who in most cases does typify his party, but in some cases, there is a radical departure by him from the heritage of Eisenhower and others. The most important crucial difference in this election campaign, in my judgment, is the approach to the control of nuclear weaponry and the inclination to control or not to control the spread of atomic weapons to other nations who don’t presently have it, particularly terrorist nations. The inclination that Governor Reagan has exemplified in many troubled times since he has been running for President – I think since 1968 – to inject American military forces in places like North Korea, to put a blockade around Cuba this year, or in some instances, to project American forces into a fishing dispute against the small nation of Ecuador on the west coast of South America. This is typical of his long-standing inclination, on the use of American power, not to resolve disputes diplomatically and peacefully, but to show that the exercise of military power is best proven by the actual use of it. Obviously, no President wants war, and I certainly do not believe that Governor Reagan, if he were President, would want war, but a President in the Oval Office has to make a judgment on almost a daily basis about how to exercise the enormous power of our country for peace, through diplomacy, or in a careless way in a belligerent attitude which has exemplified his attitudes in the past. I mentioned the radical departure of Governor Reagan from the principles or ideals of historical perspective of his own party. I don’t think that can be better illustrated than in the case of guaranteeing women equal rights under the Constitution of our nation. For 40 years, the Republican Party platforms called for guaranteeing women equal rights with a constitutional amendment. Six predecessors of mine who served in the Oval Office called for this guarantee of women’s rights. Governor Reagan and his new Republican Party have departed from this commitment – a very severe blow to the opportunity for women to finally correct discrimination under which they have suffered. When a man and a women do the same amount of work, a man gets paid $1.00, a women only gets paid 59 cents. And the equal rights amendment only says that equality of rights shall not be abridged for omen b the Federal Government or by he state governments. That is all it says a simple guarantee of equality of opportunity which typifies the Democratic arty, and which is a very important commitment of mine, as contrasted with Governor Reagan’s radical departure from the long-standing policy of his own party. Howard, I’m a Southerner, and I share the basic beliefs of my region that an excessive government intrusion into the private affairs of American citizens and also into the private affairs of the free enterprise system. One of the commitments that I made was to deregulate the major industries of this country. We’ve been remarkably successful, with the help of a Democratic Congress. We have deregulated the air industry, the rail industry, the trucking industry, financial institutions. We’re now working on the communications industry. In addition to that, I believe that this element of discrimination is something that the South has seen so vividly as a blight on our region of the country which has now been corrected – not only racial discrimination but discrimination against people that have to work for a living – because we have been trying to pick ourselves up by our bootstraps, since the long depression years, and lead a full and useful life in the affairs of this country. We have made remarkable success. It is part of my consciousness and of my commitment to continue this progress. So, my heritage as a Southerner, my experience in the Oval Office, convinces me that what I have just described is a proper course for the future. First of all, I’d like to thank the League of Women Voters for making this debate possible. I think it’s been a very constructive debate and I hope it’s helped to acquaint the American people with the sharp differences between myself and Governor Reagan. Also, I want to thank the people of Cleveland and Ohio for being such hospitable hosts during these last few hours in my life. I’ve been President now for almost four years. I’ve had to make thousands of decisions, and each one of those decisions has been a learning process. I’ve seen the strength of my nation, and I’ve seen the crises it approached in a tentative way. And I’ve had to deal with those crises as best I could. As I’ve studied the record between myself and Governor Reagan, I’ve been impressed with the stark differences that exist between us. I think the result of this debate indicates that that fact is true. I consider myself in the mainstream of my party. I consider myself in the mainstream even of the bipartisan list of Presidents who served before me. The United States must be a nation strong; the United States must be a nation secure. We must have a society that’s just and fair. And we must extend the benefits of our own commitment to peace, to create a peaceful world. I believe that since I’ve been in office, there have been six or eight areas of combat evolved in other parts of the world. In each case, I alone have had to determine the interests of my country and the degree of involvement of my country. I’ve done that with moderation, with care, with thoughtfulness; sometimes consulting experts. But, I’ve learned in this last three and a half years that when an issue is extremely difficult, when the call is very close, the chances are the experts will be divided almost 50-50. And the final judgment about the future of the nation – war, peace, involvement, reticence, thoughtfulness, care, consideration, concern – has to be made by the man in the Oval Office. It’s a lonely job, but with the involvement of the American people in the process, with an open Government, the job is a very gratifying one. The American people now are facing, next Tuesday, a lonely decision. Those listening to my voice will have to make a judgment about the future of this country. And I think they ought to remember that one vote can make a lot of difference. If one vote per precinct had changed in 1960, John Kennedy would never have been President of this nation. And if a few more people had gone to the polls and voted in 1968, Hubert Humphrey would have been President; Richard Nixon would not. There is a partnership involved in our nation. To stay strong, to stay at peace, to raise high the banner of human rights, to set an example for the rest of the world, to let our deep beliefs and commitments be felt by others in other nations, is my plan for the future. I ask the American people to join me in this partnership.